CHAPTER I


Absent or dead, still let a friend be dear,
A sigh the absent claims, the dead a tear.

POPE.


In the flattest and least agreeable part of the county of Essex, about
five miles from the sea, is situated a village or small town, which may
be known in these pages by the name of Longfield. Longfield is distant
eight miles from any market town, but the simple inhabitants, limiting
their desires to their means of satisfying them, are scarcely aware of
the kind of desert in which they are placed. Although only fifty miles
from London, few among them have ever seen the metropolis. Some claim
that distinction from having visited cousins in Lothbury and viewed the
lions in the tower. There is a mansion belonging to a wealthy nobleman
within four miles, never inhabited, except when a parliamentary election
is going forward. No one of any pretension to consequence resided in
this secluded nook, except the honourable Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry; she
ought to have been the shining star of the place, and she was only its
better angel. Benevolent, gentle, and unassuming, this fair sprig of
nobility had lived from youth to age in the abode of her forefathers,
making a part of this busy world, only through the kindliness of her
disposition, and her constant affection for one who was far away.

The mansion of the Fitzhenry family, which looked upon the village
green, was wholly incommensurate to our humblest ideas of what belongs
to nobility; yet it stood in solitary splendour, the Great House of
Longfield. From time immemorial, its possessors had been the magnates of
the village; half of it belonged to them, and the whole voted according
to their wishes. Cut off from the rest of the world, they claimed here a
consideration and a deference, which, with the moderate income of
fifteen hundred a-year, they would have vainly sought elsewhere.

There was a family tradition, that a Fitzhenry had sat in parliament;
but the time arrived, when they were to rise to greater distinction. The
father of the lady, whose name has been already introduced, enjoyed all
the privileges attendant on being an only child. Extraordinary efforts
were made for his education. He was placed with a clergyman near
Harwich, and imbibed in that neighbourhood so passionate a love for the
sea, that, though tardily and with regret, his parents at last permitted
him to pursue a naval career. He became a brave, a clever, and a lucky
officer. In a contested election, his father was the means of insuring
the success of the government candidate, and the promotion of his son
followed. Those were the glorious days of the English navy, towards the
close of the American war; and when that war terminated, and the
admiral, now advanced considerably beyond middle life, returned to the
Sabine farm, of which he had, by course of descent, become proprietor,
he returned adorned with the rank of a peer of the realm, and with
sufficient wealth to support respectably the dignity of the baronial
title.

Yet an obscure fate pursued the house of Fitzhenry, even in its ennobled
condition. The new lord was proud of his elevation, as a merited reward;
but next to the deck of his ship, he loved the tranquil precincts of his
paternal mansion, and here he spent his latter days in peace. Midway in
life, he had married the daughter of the rector of Longfield. Various
fates had attended the offspring of this union; several died, and at the
time of his being created a peer, Lord Lodore found himself a widower, with two
children. Elizabeth, who had been born twelve years before, and Henry,
whose recent birth had cost the life of his hapless and lamented mother.

But those days were long since passed away; and the first Lord Lodore, with
most of his generation, was gathered to his ancestors. To the new-sprung
race that filled up the vacant ranks, his daughter Elizabeth appeared a
somewhat ancient but most amiable maiden, whose gentle melancholy was
not (according to innumerable precedents in the traditions regarding
unmarried ladies) attributed to an ill-fated attachment, but to the
disasters that had visited her house, and still clouded the fortunes of
her family. What these misfortunes originated from, or even in what they
consisted, was not exactly known; especially at Longfield, whose
inhabitants were no adepts in the gossip of the metropolis. It was
believed that Mrs. Elizabeth's brother still lived; that some very
strange circumstances had attended his career in life, was known; but
conjecture fell lame when it tried to proceed beyond these simple facts:
it was whispered, as a wonder and a secret, that though Lord Lodore was
far away, no one knew where, his lady (as the Morning Post testified in
its lists of fashionable arrivals and fashionable parties) was a
frequent visitor to London. Once or twice the bolder gossips, male or
female, had resolved to sound (as they called it) Mrs. Elizabeth on the
subject. But the fair spinster, though innoffensive to a proverb, and
gentle beyond the wont of her gentle sex, was yet gifted with a certain
dignity of manner, and a quiet reserve, that checked these good people
at their very outset.

Henry Fitzhenry was spoken of by a few of the last generation, as having
been a fine, bold, handsome boy--generous, proud, and daring; he was
remembered, when as a youth he departed for the continent, as riding
fearlessly the best hunter in the field, and attracting the admiration
of the village maidens at church by his tall elegant figure and dark
eyes; or, when he chanced to accost them, by a nameless fascination of
manner, joined to a voice whose thrilling silver tones stirred the
listener's heart unaware. He left them like a dream, nor appeared again
till after his father's death, when he paid his sister a brief visit.
There was then something singularly grave and abstracted about him. When
he rode, it was not among the hunters, though it was soft February
weather, but in the solitary lanes, or with lightning speed over the
moors, when the sun was setting and shadows gathered round the
landscape.

Again, some years after, he had appeared among them. He was then married,
and Lady Lodore accompanied him. They stayed but three days. There was
something of fiction in the way in which the appearance of the lady was
recorded. An angel bright with celestial hues, breathing heaven, and
spreading a halo of calm and light around, as it winged swift way amidst
the dusky children of earth: such ideas seemed to appertain to the
beautiful apparition, remembered as Lord Lodore's wife. She was so
young, that time played with her as a favourite child; so etherial in
look, that the language of flowers could alone express the delicate
fairness of her skin, or the tints that sat upon her cheek: so light in
motion, and so graceful. To talk of eye or lip, of height or form, or
even of the colour of her hair, the villagers could not, for they had
been dazzled by an assemblage of charms before undreamt of by them. Her
voice won adoration, and her smile was as the sudden withdrawing of a
curtain displaying paradise upon earth. Her lord's tall, manly figure,
was recollected but as a back-ground--a fitting one--and that was all
they would allow to him--for this resplendent image. Nor was it
remembered that any excessive attachment was exhibited between them. She
had appeared indeed but as a vision--a creature from another sphere,
hastily gazing on an unknown world, and lost before they could mark more
than that void came again, and she was gone.

Since that time, Lord Lodore had been lost to Longfield. Some few months
after Mrs. Elizabeth visited London on occasion of a christening, and then
after a long interval, it was observed, that she never mentioned her
brother, and that the name of his wife acted as a spell, to bring an
expression of pain over her sedate features. Much talk circulated, and
many blundering rumours went their course through the village, and then
faded like smoke in the clear air. Some mystery there was--Lodore was
gone--his place vacant: he lived; yet his name, like those of the dead,
haunted only the memories of men, and was allied to no act or
circumstance of present existence. He was forgotten, and the inhabitants
of Longfield, returning to their obscurity, proceeded in their daily
course, almost as happy as if they had had their lord among them, to
vary the incidents of their quiet existence with the proceedings of the
"Great House."

Yet his sister remembered him. In her heart his image was traced
indelibly--limned in the colours of life. His form visited her dreams,
and was the unseen, yet not mute, companion of her solitary musings.
Years stole on, casting their clouding shadows on her cheek, and
stealing the colour from her hair, but Henry, but Lodore, was before her in
bright youth--her brother--her pride--her hope. To muse on the
possibility of his return, to read the few letters that reached her from
him, till their brief sentences seemed to imply volumes of meaning, was
the employment that made winter nights short, summer days swift in their
progress. This dreamy kind of existence, added to the old-fashioned
habits which a recluse who lives in a state of singleness is sure to
acquire, made her singularly unlike the rest of the world--causing her
to be a child in its ways, and inexpert to detect the craftiness of
others.

Lodore, in exile and obscurity, was in her eyes, the first of human beings;
she looked forward to the hour, when he would blaze upon the world with
renewed effulgence, as to a religious promise. How well did she
remember, how in grace of person, how in expression of countenance, and
dignity of manner, he transcended all those whom she saw during her
visit to London, on occasion of the memorable christening: that from
year to year this return was deferred, did not tire her patience, nor
diminish her regrets. He never grew old to her--never lost the lustre of
early manhood; and when the boyish caprice which kept him afar was
sobered, so she framed her thoughts, by the wisdom of time, he would
return again to bless her and to adorn the world. The lapse of twelve
years did not change this notion, nor the fact that, if she had cast up
an easy sum in arithmetic, the parish register would have testified, her
brother had now reached the mature age of fifty.




CHAPTER II


Settled in some secret nest,
In calm leisure let me rest;
And far off the public stage.
Pass away my silent age.

SENECA. _Marvell's Trans._


Twelve years previous to the opening of this tale, an English gentleman,
advanced to middle age, accompanied by an infant daughter, and her
attendant, arrived at a settlement in the district of the Illinois in
North America. It was at the time when this part of the country first
began to be cleared, and a new comer, with some show of property, was
considered a welcome acquisition. Still the settlement was too young,
and the people were too busy in securing for themselves the necessaries
of life, for much attention to be paid to any thing but the "overt acts"
of the stranger--the number of acres which he bought, which were few,
the extent of his clearings, and the number of workmen that he employed,
both of which were, proportionately to his possession in land, on a far
larger scale than that of any of his fellow colonists. Like magic, a
commodious house was raised on a small height that embanked the swift
river--every vestige of forest disappeared from its immediate vicinity,
replaced by agricultural cultivation, and a garden bloomed in the
wilderness. His labourers were many, and golden harvests shone in his
fields, while the dark forest, or untilled plain, seemed yet to set at
defiance the efforts of his fellow settlers; and at the same time
comforts of so civilized a description, that the Americans termed them
luxuries, appeared in the abode and reigned in the domestic arrangements
of the Englishman, although to his eye every thing was regulated by the
strictest regard to republican plainness and simplicity.

He did not mingle much in the affairs of the colony, yet his advice was
always to be commanded, and his assistance was readily afforded. He
superintended the operations carried on on his own land; and it was
observed that they differed often both from American and English modes
of agriculture. When questioned, he detailed practices in Poland and
Hungary, and gave his reasons why he thought them applicable to the soil
in question. Many of these experiments of course failed; others were
eminently successful. He did not shun labour of any sort. He joined the
hunting parties, and made one on expeditions that went out to explore
the neighbouring wilds, and the haunts of the native Indians. He gave
money for the carrying on any necessary public work, and came forward
willingly when called upon for any useful purpose. In any time of
difficulty or sorrow--on the overflowing of the stream, or the failure
of a crop, he was earnest in his endeavours to aid and to console. But
with all this, there was an insurmountable barrier between him and the
other inhabitants of the colony. He never made one at their feasts, nor
mingled in the familiar communications of daily life; his dwelling,
situated at the distance of a full mile from the village, removed him
from out of the very hearing of their festivities and assemblies. He
might labour in common with others, but his pleasures were all solitary,
and he preserved the utmost independence as far as regarded the sacred
privacy of his abode, and the silence he kept in all concerns regarding
himself alone.

At first the settlement had to struggle with all the difficulties
attendant on colonization. It grew rapidly, however, and bid fair to
become a busy and large town, when it met with a sudden check. A new
spot was discovered, a few miles distant, possessing peculiar advantages
for commercial purposes. An active, enterprising man engaged himself in
the task of establishing a town there on a larger scale and with greater
pretensions. He succeeded, and its predecessor sunk at once into
insignificance. It was matter of conjecture among them whether Mr.
Fitzhenry (so was named the English stranger) would remove to the
vicinity of the more considerable town, but no such idea seemed to have
occurred to him. Probably he rejoiced in an accident that tended to
render his abode so entirely secluded. At first the former town rapidly
declined, and many a log hut fell to ruin; but at last, having sunk into
the appearance and name of a village, it continued to exist, bearing few
marks of that busy enterprising stir which usually characterizes a new
settlement in America. The ambitious and scheming had deserted it--it
was left to those who courted tranquillity, and desired the necessaries
of life without the hope of great future gain. It acquired an almost
old-fashioned appearance. The houses began to look weatherworn, and none
with fresh faces sprung up to shame them. Extensive clearings, suddenly
checked, gave entrance to the forests, without the appendages of a
manufacture or a farm. The sound of the axe was seldom heard, and
primeval quiet again took possession of the wild. Meanwhile Mr.
Fitzhenry continued to adorn his dwelling with imported conveniences,
the result of European art, and to spend much time and labour in making
his surrounding land assume somewhat of the appearance of
pleasure-ground.

He lived in peace and solitude, and seemed to enjoy the unchanging tenor
of his life. It had not always been so. During the first three or four
years of his arrival in America, he had evidently been unquiet in his
mind, and dissatisfied with the scene around him. He gave directions to
his workmen, but did not overlook their execution. He took great pains
to secure a horse, whose fiery spirit and beautiful form might satisfy a
fastidious connoisseur. Having with much trouble and expense got several
animals of English breed together, he was perpetually seen mounted and
forcing his way amid the forest land, or galloping over the unincumbered
country. Sadness sat on his brow, and dwelt in eyes, whose dark large
orbs were peculiarly expressive of tenderness and melancholy,


"Pietosi a riguardare, a mover parchi."


Often, when in conversation on uninteresting topics, some keen sensation
would pierce his heart, his voice faltered, and an expression of
unspeakable wretchedness was imprinted on his countenance, mastered
after a momentary struggle, yet astounding to the person he might be
addressing. Generally on such occasions he would seize an immediate
opportunity to break away and to remain alone. He had been seen,
believing himself unseen, making passionate gestures, and heard uttering
some wild exclamations. Once or twice he had wandered away into the
woods, and not returned for several days, to the exceeding terror of his
little household. He evidently sought loneliness, there to combat
unobserved with the fierce enemy that dwelt within his breast. On such
occasions, when intruded upon and disturbed, he was irritated to fury.
His resentment was expressed in terms ill-adapted to republican
equality--and no one could doubt that in his own country he had filled a
high station in society, and been educated in habits of command, so that
he involuntarily looked upon himself as of a distinct and superior race
to the human beings that each day crossed his path. In general, however,
this was only shown by a certain loftiness of demeanour and cold
abstraction, which might annoy, but could not be resented. Any
ebullition of temper he was not backward to atone for by apology, and to
compensate by gifts.

There was no tinge of misanthropy in Fitzhenry's disposition. Even while
he shrunk from familiar communication with the rude and unlettered, he
took an interest in their welfare. His benevolence was active, his
compassion readily afforded. It was quickness of feeling, and not
apathy, that made him shy and retired. Sensibility checked and crushed,
an ardent thirst for sympathy which could not be allayed in the
wildernesses of America, begot a certain appearance of coldness,
altogether deceptive. He concealed his sufferings--he abhorred that they
should be pryed into; but this reserve was not natural to him, and it
added to the misery which his state of banishment occasioned.


"Quiet to quick bosoms is a hell."


And so was it with him. His passions were
powerful, and had been ungoverned. He writhed beneath the dominion of
_sameness_; and tranquillity, allied to loneliness, possessed no charms.
He groaned beneath the chains that fettered him to the spot, where he
was withering in inaction. They caused unutterable throes and paroxysms
of despair. Ennui, the dæmon, waited at the threshold of his noiseless
refuge, and drove away the stirring hopes and enlivening expectations,
which form the better part of life. Sensibility in such a situation is a
curse: men become "cannibals of their own hearts;" remorse, regret, and
restless impatience usurp the place of more wholesome feeling: every
thing seems better than that which is; and solitude becomes a sort of
tangible enemy, the more dangerous, because it dwells within the citadel
itself. Borne down by such emotions, Fitzhenry was often about to yield
to the yearnings of his soul, and to fly from repose into action,
however accompanied by strife and wretchedness; to leave America, to
return to Europe, and to face at once all the evils which he had
journeyed so far to escape. He did not--he remained. His motives for
flight returned on him with full power after any such paroxysm, and held
him back. He despised himself for his hesitation. He had made his
choice, and would abide by it. He was not so devoid of manliness as to
be destitute of fortitude, or so dependent a wretch as not to have
resources in himself. He would cultivate these, and obtain that peace
which it had been his boast that he should experience.

It came at last. Time and custom accomplished their task, and he became
reconciled to his present mode of existence. He grew to love his home in
the wilderness. It was all his own creation, and the pains and thought
he continued to bestow upon it, rendered it doubly his. The murmur of
the neighbouring river became the voice of a friend; it welcomed him on
his return from any expedition; and he hailed the first echo of it that
struck upon his ear from afar, with a thrill of joy.

Peace descended upon his soul. He became enamoured of the independence
of solitude, and the sublime operations of surrounding nature. All
further attempts at cultivation having ceased in his neighbourhood, from
year to year nothing changed, except at the bidding of the months, in
obedience to the varying seasons;--nothing changed, except that the moss
grew thicker and greener upon the logs that supported his roof, that the
plants he cultivated increased in strength and beauty, and that the
fruit-trees yielded their sweet produce in greater abundance. The
improvements he had set on foot displayed in their progress the taste
and ingenuity of their projector; and as the landscape became more
familiar, so did a thousand associations twine themselves with its
varied appearances, till the forests and glades became as friends and
companions.

As he learnt to be contented with his lot, the inequalities of humour,
and singularities of conduct, which had at first attended him, died
away. He had grown familiar with the persons of his fellow-colonists,
and their various fortunes interested him. Though he could find no
friend, tempered like him, like him nursed in the delicacies and
fastidiousness of the societies of the old world;--though he, a china
vase, dreaded too near a collision with the brazen ones around; yet,
though he could not give his confidence, or unburthen the treasure of
his soul, he could approve of, and even feel affection for several among
them. Personal courage, honesty, and frankness, were to be found among
the men; simplicity and kindness among the women. He saw instances of
love and devotion in members of families, that made him sigh to be one
of them; and the strong sense and shrewd observations of many of the
elder settlers exercised his understanding. They opened, by their
reasonings and conversation, a new source of amusement, and presented
him with another opiate for his too busy memory.

Fitzhenry had been a patron of the fine arts; and thus he had loved
books, poetry, and the elegant philosophy of the ancients. But he had
not been a student. His mind was now in a fit state to find solace in
reading, and excitement in the pursuit of knowledge. At first he sent
for a few books, such as he wished immediately to consult, from New
York, and made slight additions to the small library of classical
literature he had originally brought with him on his emigration. But
when once the desire to instruct himself was fully aroused in his mind,
he became aware how slight and inadequate his present library was, even
for the use of one man. Now each quarter brought chests of a commodity
he began to deem the most precious upon earth. Beings with human forms
and human feelings he had around him; but, as if made of coarser,
half-kneaded clay, they wanted the divine spark of mind and the polish
of taste. He had pined for these, and now they were presented to him.
Books became his friends: they, when rightly questioned, could answer to
his thoughts. Plato could elevate, Epictetus calm, his soul. He could
revel with Ovid in the imagery presented by a graceful, though
voluptuous imagination; and hang enchanted over the majesty and elegance
of Virgil. Homer was as a dear and revered friend--Horace a pleasant
companion. English, Italian, German, and French, all yielded their
stores in turn; and the abstruse sciences were often a relaxation to a
mind, whose chief bane was its dwelling too entirely upon one idea. He
made a study, also, of the things peculiarly befitting his present
situation; and he rose in the estimation of those around, as they became
aware of his talents and his knowledge.

Study and occupation restored to his heart self-complacency, which is an
ingredient so necessary to the composition of human happiness. He felt
himself to be useful, and knew himself to be honoured. He no longer
asked himself, "Why do I live?" or looked on the dark, rapid waves, and
longed for the repose that was in their gift. The blood flowed equably
in his veins; a healthy temperance regulated his hopes and wishes. He
could again bless God for the boon of existence, and look forward to
future years, if not with eager anticipation, yet with a calm reliance
upon the power of good, wholly remote from despair.




CHAPTER III


_Miranda._--Alack! what trouble
Was I then to you!
_Prospero._--O, a cherubim
Thou wast, that did preserve me!

THE TEMPEST.


Such was the Englishman who had taken refuge in the furthest wilds of an
almost untenanted portion of the globe. Like a Corinthian column, left
single amidst the ruder forms of the forest oaks, standing in alien
beauty, a type of civilization and the arts, among the rougher, though
perhaps not less valuable, growth of Nature's own. Refined to
fastidiousness, sensitive to morbidity, the stranger was respected
without being understood, and loved though the intimate of none.

Many circumstances have been mentioned as tending to reconcile Fitzhenry
to his lot; and yet one has been omitted, chiefest of all;--the growth
and development of his child was an inexhaustible source of delight and
occupation. She was scarcely three years old when her parent first came
to the Illinois. She was then a plaything and an object of solicitude to
him, and nothing more. Much as her father loved her, he had not then
learned to discover the germ of the soul just nascent in her infant
form; nor to watch the formation, gradual to imperceptibility, of her
childish ideas. He would watch over her as she slept, and gaze on her as
she sported in the garden, with ardent and unquiet fondness; and, from
time to time, instil some portion of knowledge into her opening mind:
but this was all done by snatches, and at intervals. His affection for
her was the passion of his soul; but her society was not an occupation
for his thoughts. He would have knelt to kiss her footsteps as she
bounded across the grass, and tears glistened in his eyes as she
embraced his knees on his return from any excursion; but her prattle
often wearied him, and her very presence was sometimes the source of
intense pain.

He did not know himself how much he loved her, till she became old
enough to share his excursions and be a companion. This occurred at a
far earlier age than would have been the case had she been in England,
living in a nursery with other children. There is a peculiarity in the
education of a daughter, brought up by a father only, which tends to
develop early a thousand of those portions of mind, which are folded up,
and often destroyed, under mere feminine tuition. He made her fearless,
by making her the associate of his rides; yet his incessant care and
watchfulness, the observant tenderness of his manner, almost reverential
on many points, springing from the differences of sex, tended to soften
her mind, and make her spirit ductile and dependent. He taught her to
scorn pain, but to shrink with excessive timidity from any thing that
intrenched on the barrier of womanly reserve which he raised about her.
Nothing was dreaded, indeed, by her, except his disapprobation; and a
word or look from him made her, with all her childish vivacity and
thoughtlessness, turn as with a silken string, and bend at once to his
will.

There was an affectionateness of disposition kneaded up in the very
texture of her soul, which gave it its "very form and pressure." It
accompanied every word and action; it revealed itself in her voice, and
hung like light over the expression of her countenance.

Her earliest feeling was love of her father. She would sit to watch him,
guess at his thoughts, and creep close, or recede away, as she read
encouragement, or the contrary, in his eyes and gestures. Except him,
her only companion was her servant; and very soon she distinguished
between them, and felt proud and elate when she quitted her for her
father's side. Soon, she almost never quitted it. Her gentle and docile
disposition rendered her unobtrusive, while her inexhaustible spirits
were a source of delightful amusement. The goodness of her heart
endeared her still more; and when it was called forth by any demand made
on it by him, it was attended by such a display of excessive
sensibility, as at once caused him to tremble for her future happiness,
and love her ten thousand times more. She grew into the image on which
his eye doated, and for whose presence his heart perpetually yearned.
Was he reading, or otherwise occupied, he was restless, if yet she were
not in the room; and she would remain in silence for hours, occupied by
some little feminine work, and all the while watching him, catching his
first glance towards her, and obeying the expression of his countenance,
before he could form his wish into words. When he left her for any of
his longer excursions, her little heart would heave, and almost burst
with sorrow. On his return, she was always on the watch to see, to fly
into his arms, and to load him with infantine caresses.

There was something in her face, that at this early age gave token of
truth and affection, and asked for sympathy. Her large brown eyes, such
as are called hazel, full of tenderness and sweetness, possessed within
their depths an expression and a latent fire, which stirred the heart.
It is difficult to describe, or by words to call before another's mind,
the picture so palpable to our own. The moulding of her cheek, full just
below the eyes, and ending in a soft oval, gave a peculiar expression,
at once beseeching and tender, and yet radiant with vivacity and
gladness. Frankness and truth were reflected on her brow, like flowers
in the clearest pool; the thousand nameless lines and mouldings, which
create expression, were replete with beaming innocence and irresistible
attraction. Her small chiselled nose, her mouth so delicately curved,
gave token of taste. In the whole was harmony, and the upper part of the
countenance seemed to reign over the lower and to ennoble it, making her
usual placid expression thoughtful and earnest; so that not until she
smiled and spoke, did the gaiety of her guileless heart display itself,
and the vivacity of her disposition give change and relief to the
picture. Her figure was light and airy, tall at an early age, and
slender. Her rides and rambles gave elasticity to her limbs, and her
step was like that of the antelope, springy and true. She had no fears,
no deceit, no untold thought within her. Her matchless sweetness of
temper prevented any cloud from ever dimming her pure loveliness: her
voice cheered the heart, and her laugh rang so true and joyous on the
ear, that it gave token in itself of the sympathizing and buoyant spirit
which was her great charm. Nothing with her centred in self; she was
always ready to give her soul away: to please her father was the
unsleeping law of all her actions, while his approbation imparted a
sense of such pure but entire happiness, that every other feeling faded
into insignificance in the comparison.

In the first year of exile and despair, Fitzhenry looked forward to the
long drawn succession of future years, with an impatience of woe
difficult to be borne. He was surprised to find, as he proceeded in the
quiet path of life which he had selected, that instead of an increase of
unhappiness, a thousand pleasures smiled around him. He had looked on it
as a bitter task to forget that he had a name and country, both
abandoned for ever; now, the thought of these seldom recurred to his
memory. His forest home became all in all to him. Wherever he went, his
child was by his side, to cheer and enliven him. When he looked on her,
and reflected that within her frame dwelt spotless innocence and filial
piety, that within that lovely "bower of flesh," not one thought or
feeling resided that was not akin to heaven in its purity and sweetness,
he, as by infection, acquired a portion of the calm enjoyment, which she
in her taintless youth naturally possessed.

Even when any distant excursion forced him to absent himself, her idea
followed him to light him cheerily on his way. He knew that he should
find her on his return busied in little preparations for his welcome. In
summer time, the bower in the garden would be adorned; in the inclement
season of winter the logs would blaze on the hearth, his chair be drawn
towards the fire, the stool for Ethel at his feet, with nothing to
remind him of the past, save her dear presence, which drew its greatest
charm, not from that, but from the present. Fitzhenry forgot the
thousand delights of civilization, for which formerly his heart had
painfully yearned. He forgot ambition, and the enticements of gay
vanity; peace and security appeared the greatest blessings of life, and
he had them here.

Ethel herself was happy beyond the knowledge of her own happiness. She
regretted nothing in the old country. She grew up among the grandest
objects of nature, and they were the sweet influences to excite her to
love and to a sense of pleasure. She had come to the Illinois attended
by a black woman and her daughter, whom her father had engaged to attend
her at New York, and had been sedulously kept away from communication
with the settlers--an arrangement which it would have been difficult to
bring about elsewhere, but in this secluded and almost deserted spot the
usual characteristics of the Americans were scarcely to be found. Most
of the inhabitants were emigrants from Scotland, a peaceable,
hard-working population.

Ethel lived alone in their lonely dwelling. Had she been of a more
advanced age when taken from England, her curiosity might have been
excited by the singularity of her position; but we rarely reason about
that which has remained unchanged since infancy; taking it as a part of
the immutable order of things, we yield without a question to its
controul. Ethel did not know that she was alone. Her attendants she was
attached to, and she idolized her father; his image filled all her
little heart. Playmate she had none, save a fawn and a kid, a dog grown
old in her service, and a succession of minor favourites of the animal
species.

It was Fitzhenry's wish to educate his daughter to all the perfection of
which the feminine character is susceptible. As the first step, he cut
her off from familiar communication with the unrefined, and, watching
over her with the fondest care, kept her far aloof from the very
knowledge of what might, by its baseness or folly, contaminate the
celestial beauty of her nature. He resolved to make her all that woman
can be of generous, soft, and devoted; to purge away every alloy of
vanity and petty passion--to fill her with honour, and yet to mould her
to the sweetest gentleness: to cultivate her tastes and enlarge her
mind, yet so to controul her acquirements, as to render her ever pliant
to his will. She was to be lifted above every idea of artifice or guile,
or the caballing spirit of the worldling--she was to be single-hearted,
yet mild. A creature half poetry, half love--one whose pure lips had
never been tainted by an untruth--an enthusiastic being, who could give
her life away for the sake of another, and yet who honoured herself as a
consecrated thing reserved for one worship alone. She was taught that no
misfortune should penetrate her soul, except such as visited her
affections, or her sense of right; and that, set apart from the vulgar
uses of the world, she was connected with the mass only through
another--that other, now her father and only friend--hereafter,
whosoever her heart might select as her guide and head. Fitzhenry drew
his chief ideas from Milton's Eve, and adding to this the romance of
chivalry, he satisfied himself that his daughter would be the embodied
ideal of all that is adorable and estimable in her sex.

The instructor can scarcely give sensibility where it is essentially
wanting, nor talent to the unpercipient block. But he can cultivate and
detect the affections of the pupil, who puts forth, as a parasite,
tendrils by which to cling, not knowing to what--to a supporter or a
destroyer. The careful rearer of the ductile human plant can instil his
own religion, and surround the soul by such a moral atmosphere, as shall
become to its latest day the air it breathes. Ethel, from her delicate
organization and quick parts, was sufficiently plastic in her father's
hands. When not with him, she was the playmate of nature. Her birds and
pet animals--her untaught but most kind nurse, were her associates: she
had her flowers to watch over, her music, her drawings, and her books.
Nature, wild, interminable, sublime, was around her. The ceaseless flow
of the brawling stream, the wide-spread forest, the changes of the sky,
the career of the wide-winged clouds, when the winds drove them athwart
the atmosphere, or the repose of the still, and stirless summer air, the
stormy war of the elements, and the sense of trust and security amidst
their loudest disturbances, were all circumstances to mould her even
unconsciously to an admiration of all that is grand and beautiful.

A lofty sense of independence is, in man, the best privilege of his
nature. It cannot be doubted, but that it were for the happiness of the
other sex that she were taught more to rely on and act for herself. But
in the cultivation of this feeling, the education of Fitzhenry was
lamentably deficient. Ethel was taught to know herself dependent; the
support of another was to be as necessary to her as her daily food. She
leant on her father as a prop that could not fail, and she was wholly
satisfied with her condition. Her peculiar disposition of course tinged
Fitzhenry's theories with colours not always their own, and her entire
want of experience in intercourse with her fellow-creatures, gave a more
decided tone to her sense of dependence than she could have acquired, if
the circumstances of her daily life had brought her into perpetual
collision with others. She was habitually cheerful even to gaiety; yet
her character was not devoid of petulence, which might become rashness
or self-will if left to herself. She had a clear and upright spirit, and
suspicion or unkindness roused her to indignation, or sunk her into the
depths of sorrow. Place her in danger, and tell her she must encounter
it, and she called up all her courage and became a heroine; but on less
occasions, difficulties dismayed and annoyed her, and she longed to
escape from them into that dreamy existence, for which her solitary mode
of life had given her a taste: active in person, in mind she was too
often indolent, and apt to think that while she was docile to the
injunctions of her parent, all her duties were fulfilled. She seldom
thought, and never acted, for herself.

With all this she was so caressingly affectionate, so cheerful and
obedient, that she inspired her father with more than a father's
fondness. He lived but for her and in her. Away, she was present to his
imagination, the loadstone to draw him home, and to fill that home with
pleasure. He exalted her in his fancy into angelic perfection, and
nothing occurred to blot the fair idea. He in prospect gave up his whole
life to the warding off every evil from her dear and sacred head. He
knew, or rather believed, that while we possess one real, devoted, and
perfect friend, we cannot be truly miserable. He said to himself--though
he did not love to dwell on the thought--that of course cares and
afflictions might hereafter befal her; but he was to stand the shield to
blunt the arrows of sorrow--the shelter in which she might find refuge
from every evil ministration. The worst ills of life, penury and
desertion, she could never know; and surely he, who would stand so fast
by her through all--whose nightly dream and waking thought was for her
good, would even, when led to form other connexions in life, so command
her affections as to be able to influence her happiness.

Not being able to judge by comparison, Ethel was unaware of the
peculiarity of her good fortune in possessing such a father. But she
loved him entirely; looked up to him, and saw in him the reward of every
exertion, the object of each day's employment. In early youth we have no
true notion of what the realities of life are formed, and when we look
forward it is without any correct estimate of the chances of existence.
Ethel's visionary ideas were all full of peace, seclusion, and her
father. America, or rather the little village of the Illinois which she
inhabited, was all the world to her; and she had no idea that nearly
every thing that connected her to society existed beyond the far
Atlantic, in that tiny isle which made so small a show upon her maps.
Fitzhenry never mentioned these things to his daughter. She arrived at
the age of fifteen without forming a hope that should lead her beyond
the pale which had hitherto enclosed her, or having imagined that any
train of circumstances might suddenly transplant her from the lonely
wilderness to the thronged resorts of mankind.




CHAPTER IV


Les deserts sont faits pour les amants, mais l'amour
ne se fait pas aux deserts.

LE BARBIER DE PARIS.


Twelve years had led Ethel from infancy to childhood; and from child's
estate to the blooming season of girlhood. It had brought her father
from the prime of a man's life, to the period when it began to decline.
Our feelings probably are not less strong at fifty than they were ten or
fifteen years before; but they have changed their objects, and dwell on
far different prospects. At five-and-thirty a man thinks of what his own
existence is; when the maturity of age has grown into its autumn, he is
wrapt up in that of others. The loss of wife or child then becomes more
deplorable, as being impossible to repair; for no fresh connexion can
give us back the companion of our earlier years, nor a "new sprung race"
compensate for that, whose career we hoped to see run. Fitzhenry had
been a man of violent passions; they had visited his life with hurricane
and desolation;--were these dead within him? The complacency that now
distinguished his physiognomy seemed to vouch for internal peace. But
there was an abstracted melancholy in his dark eyes--a look that went
beyond the objects immediately before him, that seemed to say that he
often anxiously questioned fate, and meditated with roused fears on the
secrets of futurity.

Educating his child, and various other employments, had occupied and
diverted him. He had been content; he asked for no change, but he
dreaded it. Often when packets arrived from England he hesitated to open
them. He could not account for his new-born anxieties. Was change
approaching? "How long will you be at peace?" Such warning voice
startled him in the solitude of the forests: he looked round, but no
human being was near, yet the voice had spoken audibly to his sense; and
when a transient air swept the dead leaves near, he shrunk as if a
spirit passed, invisible to sight, and yet felt by the subtle
atmosphere, as it gave articulation and motion to it.

"How long shall I be at peace?" A thrill ran through his veins. "Am I
then _now_ at peace? Do love, and hate, and despair, no longer wage their
accustomed war in my heart? and is it true that gently flowing as my
days have lately been, that during their course I have not felt those
mortal throes that once made life so intolerable a burthen? It is so. I
_am at peace_; strange state for suffering mortality! And this is not to
last? My daughter! there only am I vulnerable; yet have I surrounded her
with a sevenfold shield. My own sweet Ethel! how can I avert from your
dear head the dark approaching storm?

"But this is folly. These waking dreams are the curse of inaction and
solitude. Yesterday I refused to accompany the exploring party. I will
go--I am not old; fatigue, as yet, does not seem a burthen; but I shall
sink into premature age, if I allow this indolence to overpower me. I
will set out on this expedition, and thus I shall no longer be at
peace." Fitzhenry smiled as if thus he were cheating destiny.

The proposed journey was one to be made by a party of his
fellow-settlers, to trace the route between their town and a large one,
two hundred miles off, to discover the best mode of communication. There
was nothing very arduous in the undertaking. It was September, and
hunting would diversify the tediousness of their way. Fitzhenry left his
daughter under the charge of her attendants, to amuse herself with her
books, her music, her gardening, her needle, and, more than all, her new
and very favourite study of drawing and sketching. Hitherto the pencil
had scarcely been one of her occupations; but an accident gave scope to
her acquiring in it that improvement for which she found that she had
prodigious inclination, and she was assured, no inconsiderable talent.

The occasion that had given rise to this new employment was this. Three
or four months before, a traveller arrived for the purpose of settling,
who claimed a rather higher intellectual rank than those around him. He
was the son of an honest tradesman of the city of London. He displayed
early signs of talent, and parental fondness gave him opportunities of
cultivating it. The means of his family were small, but some of the
boy's drawings having attracted the attention of an artist, he entered
upon the profession of a painter, with sanguine hopes of becoming
hereafter an ornament to it.

Two obstacles were in the way of his success. He wanted that intense
love of his art--that enthusiastic perseverance in labour, which
distinguishes the man of genius from the man of talent merely. He
regarded it as a means, not an end. Probably therefore he did not feel
that capacity in himself for attaining first-rate excellence, which had
been attributed to him. He had a taste also for social pleasures and
vulgar indulgencies, incompatible with industry and with that refinement
of mind which is so necessary an adjunct to the cultivation of the
imaginative arts. Whitelock had none of all this; but he was quick,
clever, and was looked on among his associates as a spirited, agreeable
fellow. The death of his parents left him in possession of their little
wealth: depending for the future on the resources which his talent
promised him, he dissipated the two or three hundred pounds which formed
his inheritance: debt, difficulties, with consequent abstraction from
his profession, completed his ruin. He arrived at the Illinois in search
of an uncle, on whose kindness he intended to depend, with six dollars
in his purse. His uncle had long before disappeared from that part of
the country. Whitelock found himself destitute. Neither his person,
which was diminutive, nor his constitution, which was delicate, fitted
him for manual labour; nor was he acquainted with any mechanic art. What
could he do in America? He began to feel very deeply the inroads of
despair, when hearing of the superior wealth of Mr. Fitzhenry, and that
he was an Englishman, he paid him a visit, feeling secure that he could
interest him in his favour.

The emigrant's calculations were just. His distinguished countryman
exerted himself to enable the young man to obtain a subsistence. He
established him in a school, and gave him his best counsels how to
proceed. Whitelock thanked him; commenced the most odious task of
initiating the young Americans in the rudiments of knowledge, and sought
meanwhile to amuse himself to the best of his power. Fitzhenry's house
he first made his resort. He was not to be baffled by the reserved
courtesy of his host. The comfort and English appearance of the exile's
dwelling were charming to him; and while he could hear himself talk, he
fancied that every one about him must be satisfied. Fitzhenry was
excessively annoyed. There was an innate vulgarity in his visitant, and
an unlicensed familiarity that jarred painfully with the refined habits
of his sensitive nature. Still, in America he had been forced to
tolerate even worse than this, and he bore Whitelock's intrusions as
well as he could, seeking only to put such obstacles in the way of his
too frequent visits, as would best serve to curtail them. Whitelock's
chief merit was his talent; he had a real eye for the outward forms of
nature, for the tints in which she loves to robe herself, and the beauty
in which she is for ever invested. He occupied himself by sketching the
surrounding scenery, and gave life and interest to many a savage glade
and solitary nook, which, till he came, had not been discovered to be
picturesque. Ethel regarded his drawings with wonder and delight, and
easily obtained permission from her father to take lessons in the
captivating art. Fitzhenry thought that of all occupations, that of the
pencil, if pursued earnestly and with real taste, most conduced to the
student's happiness. Its scope is not personal display, as is the case
most usually with music, and yet it has a visible result which satisfies
the mind that something has been done. It does not fatigue the attention
like the study of languages, yet it suffices to call forth the powers,
and to fill the mind with pleasurable sensations. It is a most feminine
occupation, well replacing, on a more liberal and rational scale, the
tapestry of our grandmothers. Ethel had already shown a great
inclination for design, and her father was glad of so favourable an
opportunity for cultivating it. A few difficulties presented themselves.
Whitelock had brought his own materials with him, but he possessed no
superfluity--and they were not to be procured at the settlement. The
artist offered to transfer them all for Ethel's convenience to her own
abode, so that he might have free leave to occupy himself there also.
Fitzhenry saw all the annoyances consequent on this plan, and it was
finally arranged that his daughter should, three or four times a week,
visit the school-house, and in a little room, built apart for her
especial use, pursue her study.

The habit of seeing and instructing his lovely pupil awoke new ideas in
Whitelock's fruitful brain. Who was Mr. Fitzhenry? What did he in the
Illinois? Whitelock sounded him carefully, but gathered no information,
except that this gentleman showed no intention of ever quitting the
settlement. But this was much. He was evidently in easy
circumstances--Ethel was his only child. She was here a garden-rose
amidst briars, and Whitelock flattered himself that his position was not
materially different. Could he succeed in the scheme that all these
considerations suggested to him, his fortune was made, or, at least, he
should bid adieu for ever to blockhead boys and the dull labours of
instruction. As these views opened upon him, he took more pains to
ingratiate himself with Fitzhenry. He became humble; he respectfully
sought his advice--and while he contrived a thousand modes of throwing
himself in his way, he appeared less intrusive than before--and yet he
felt that he did not get on. Fitzhenry was kind to him, as a countryman
in need of assistance; he admired his talent as an artist, but he shrunk
from the smallest approach to intimacy. Whitelock hoped that he was only
shy, but he feared that he was proud; he tried to break through the
barrier of reserve opposed to him, and he became a considerable
annoyance to the recluse. He waylaid him during his walks with his
daughter--forced his company upon them, and forging a thousand obliging
excuses for entering their dwelling, he destroyed the charm of their
quiet evenings, and yet tempered his manners with such shows of humility
and gratitude as Fitzhenry could not resist.

Whitelock next tried his battery on the young lady herself. Her passion
for her new acquirement afforded scope for his enterprizing disposition.
She was really glad to see him whenever he came; questioned him about
the pictures which existed in the old world, and, with a mixture of
wonder and curiosity, began to think that there was magic in an art,
that produced the effects which he described. With all the enthusiasm of
youth, she tried to improve herself, and the alacrity with which she
welcomed her master, or hurried to his school, looked almost
like--Whitelock could not exactly tell what, but here was ground to work
upon.

When Fitzhenry went on the expedition already mentioned, Ethel gave up
all her time, with renewed ardour, to her favourite pursuit. Early in
the morning she was seen tripping down to the school-house, accompanied
by her faithful negro woman. The attendant used her distaff and spindle,
Ethel her brush, and the hours flew unheeded. Whitelock would have been
glad that her eyes had not always been so intently fixed on the paper
before her. He proposed sketching from nature. They made studies from
trees, and contemplated the changing hues of earth and sky together.
While talking of tints, and tones of colour spread over the celestial
hemisphere and the earth beneath, were it not an easy transition to
speak of those which glistened in a lady's eye, or warmed her cheek? In
the solitude of his chamber, thus our adventurer reasoned; and wondered
each night why he hesitated to begin. Whitelock was short and ill-made.
His face was not of an agreeable cast: it was impossible to see him
without being impressed with the idea that he was a man of talent; but
he was otherwise decidedly ugly. This disadvantage was counterbalanced
by an overweening vanity, which is often to be remarked in those whose
personal defects place them a step below their fellows. He knew the
value of an appearance of devotion, and the power which an
acknowledgment of entire thraldom exercises over the feminine
imagination. He had succeeded ill with the father; but, after all, the
surest way was to captivate the daughter: the affection of her parent
would induce him to ratify any step necessary to her happiness; and the
chance afforded by this parent's absence for putting his plan into
execution, might never again occur--why then delay?

It was, perhaps, strange that Fitzhenry, alive to the smallest evil that
might approach his darling child, and devoted to her sole guardianship,
should have been blind to the sort of danger which she ran during his
absence. But the paternal protection is never entirely efficient. A
father avenges an insult; but he has seldom watchfulness enough to
prevent it. In the present instance, the extreme youth of Ethel might
well serve as an excuse. She was scarcely fifteen; and, light-hearted
and blithe, none but childish ideas had found place in her unruffled
mind. Her father yet regarded her as he had done when she was wont to
climb his knee, or to gambol before him: he still looked forward to her
womanhood as to a distant event, which would necessitate an entire
change in his mode of living, but which need not for several years enter
into his calculations. Thus, when he departed, he felt glad to get rid,
for a time, of Whitelock's disagreeable society; but it never crossed
his imagination that his angelic girl could be annoyed or injured,
meanwhile, by the presumptuous advances of a man whom he despised.

Ethel knew nothing of the language of love. She had read of it in her
favourite poets; but she was yet too young and guileless to apply any of
its feelings to herself. Love had always appeared to her blended with
the highest imaginative beauty and heroism, and thus was in her eyes, at
once awful and lovely. Nothing had vulgarized it to her. The greatest
men were its slaves, and according as their choice fell on the worthy or
unworthy, they were elevated or disgraced by passion. It was the part of
a woman so to refine and educate her mind, as to be the cause of good
alone to him whose fate depended on her smile. There was something of
the Orondates' vein in her ideas; but they were too vague and general to
influence her actions. Brought up in American solitude, with all the
refinement attendant on European society, she was aristocratic, both as
regarded rank and sex; but all these were as yet undeveloped
feelings--seeds planted by the careful paternal hand, not yet called
into life or growth.

Whitelock began his operations, and was obliged to be explicit to be at
all understood. He spoke of misery and despair; he urged no plea, sought
no favour, except to be allowed to speak of his wretchedness. Ethel
listened--Eve listened to the serpent, and since then, her daughters
have been accused of an aptitude to give ear to forbidden discourse. He
spoke well, too, for he was a man of unquestioned talent. It is a
strange feeling for a girl, when first she finds the power put into her
hand of influencing the destiny of another to happiness or misery. She
is like a magician holding for the first time a fairy wand, not having
yet had experience of its potency. Ethel had read of the power of love;
but a doubt had often suggested itself, of how far she herself should
hereafter exercise the influence which is the attribute of her sex.
Whitelock dispelled that doubt. He impressed on her mind the idea that
he lived or died through her fiat.

For one instant, vanity awoke in her young heart; and she tripped back
to her home with a smile of triumph on her lips. The feeling was
short-lived. She entered her father's library; and his image appeared to
rise before her, to regulate and purify her thoughts. If he had been
there, what could she have said to him--she who never concealed a
thought?--or how would he have received the information she had to give?
What had happened, had not been the work of a day; Whitelock had for a
week or two proceeded in an occult and mysterious manner: but this day
he had withdrawn the veil; and she understood much that had appeared
strange in him before. The dark, expressive eyes of her father she
fancied to be before her, penetrating the depths of her soul,
discovering her frivolity, and censuring her lowly vanity; and, even
though alone, she felt abashed. Our faults are apt to assume giant and
exaggerated forms to our eyes in youth, and Ethel felt degraded and
humiliated; and remorse sprung up in her gentle heart, substituting
itself for the former pleasurable emotion.

The young are always in extremes. Ethel put away her drawings and
paintings. She secluded herself in her home; and arranged so well, that
notwithstanding the freedom of American manners, Whitelock contrived to
catch but a distant glimpse of her during the one other week that
intervened before her father's return. Troubled at this behaviour, he
felt his bravery ooze out. To have offended Fitzhenry, was an unwise
proceeding, at best; but when he remembered the haughty and reserved
demeanour of the man, he recoiled, trembling, from the prospect of
encountering him.

Ethel was very concise in the expressions she used, to make her father,
on his return, understand what had happened during his absence.
Fitzhenry heard her with indignation and bitter self-reproach. The
natural impetuosity of his disposition returned on him, like a stream
which had been checked in its progress, but which had gathered strength
from the delay. On a sudden, the future, with all its difficulties and
trials, presented itself to his eyes; and he was determined to go out to
meet them, rather than to await their advent in his seclusion. His
resolution formed and he put it into immediate execution: he would
instantly quit the Illinois. The world was before him; and while he
paused on the western shores of the Atlantic, he could decide upon his
future path. But he would not remain where he was another season. The
present, the calm, placid present, had fled like morning mist before the
new risen breeze: all appeared dark and turbid to his heated
imagination. Change alone could appease the sense of danger that had
risen within him. Change of place, of circumstances,--of all that for
the last twelve years had formed his life. "How long am I to remain at
peace?"--the prophetic voice heard in the silence of the forests,
recurred to his memory, and thrilled through his frame. "Peace! was I
ever at peace? Was this unquiet heart ever still, as, one by one, the
troubled thoughts which are its essence, have risen and broken against
the barriers that embank them? Peace! My own Ethel!--all I have
done--all I would do--is to gift thee with that blessing which has for
ever fled the thirsting lips of thy unhappy parent." And thus, governed
by a fevered fancy and untamed passions, Fitzhenry forgot the tranquil
lot which he had learnt to value and enjoy; and quitting the haven he
had sought, as if it had never been a place of shelter to him,
unthankful for the many happy hours which had blessed him there, he
hastened to reach the stormier seas of life, whose breakers and whose
winds were ready to visit him with shipwreck and destruction.




CHAPTER V


"The boy is father of the man."

WORDSWORTH.


Fitzhenry having formed his resolution, acted upon it immediately: and
yet, while hastening every preparation for his departure, he felt return
upon him that inquietude and intolerable sense of suffering, which of
late years had subsided in his soul. Now and then it struck him as
madness to quit his house, his garden, the trees of his planting, the
quiet abode which he had reared in the wilderness. He gave his orders,
but he was unable to command himself to attend to any of the minutiæ of
circumstance connected with his removal. As when he first arrived, again
he sought relief in exercise and the open air. He felt each ministration
of nature to be his friend, and man, in every guise, to be his enemy. He
was about to plunge among them again. What would be the result?

Yet this was no abode for the opening bloom of Ethel. For her good his
beloved and safe seclusion must be sacrificed, and that he was acting
for her benefit, and not his own, served to calm his mind. She
contemplated their migration with something akin to joy. We could almost
believe that we are destined by Providence to an unsettled position on
the globe, so invariably is a love of change implanted in the young. It
seems as if the eternal Lawgiver intended that, at a certain age, man
should leave father, mother, and the dwelling of his infancy, to seek
his fortunes over the wide world. A few natural tears Ethel shed--they
were not many. She, usually so resigned and quiet in her feelings, was
now in a state of excitement: dreamy, shadowy visions floated before her
of what would result from her journey, and curiosity and hope gave life
and a bright colouring to the prospect.

The day came at last. On the previous Sunday she had knelt for the last
time in church on the little hassock which had been her's from infancy,
and walked along the accustomed pathway towards her home for the last
time. During the afternoon, she visited the village to bid adieu to her
few acquaintances. The sensitive refinement of Fitzhenry had caused him
to guard his daughter jealously from familiar intercourse with their
fellow settlers, even as a child. But she had been accustomed to enter
the poorer cottages, to assist the distressed, and now and then to
partake of tea drinking with the minister. This personage, however, was
not stationary. At one time they had had a venerable old man whom Ethel
had begun to love; but latterly, the pastor had not been a person to
engage her liking, and this had loosened her only tie with her fellow
colonists.

The day came. The father and daughter, with three attendants, entered
their carriage, and wound along the scarcely formed road. One by one
they passed, and lost sight of objects, that for many years had been
woven in with the texture of their lives. Fitzhenry was sad. Ethel wept,
unconstrainedly, plentiful showery tears, which cost so much less to the
heart, than the few sorrowful drops which, in after life, we expend upon
our woes. Still as they proceeded the objects that met their eyes became
less familiar and less endeared. They began to converse, and when they
arrived at their lodging for the night, Ethel was cheerful, and her
father, mastering the unquiet feelings which disturbed him, exerted
himself to converse with her on such topics as would serve to introduce
her most pleasantly to the new scenes which she was about to visit.

There was one object, however, which lay nearest to the emigrant's
heart, to which he had not yet acquired courage to allude; his own
position in the world, his former fortunes, and the circumstances that
had driven him from Europe, to seek peace and obscurity in the
wilderness. It was a strange tale; replete with such incidents as could
scarcely be made intelligible to the nursling of solitude--one difficult
for a father to disclose to his daughter; involving besides a
consideration of his future conduct, to which he did not desire to make
her a party. Thus they talked of the cities they might see, and the
strange sights she would behold, and but once did her father refer to
their own position. After a long silence, on his part sombre and
abstracted--as Prospero asked the ever sweet Miranda, so did Fitzhenry
inquire of his daughter, if she had memory of aught preceding their
residence in the Illinois? And Ethel, as readily as Miranda, replied in
the affirmative.

"And what, my love, do you remember? Gold-laced liveries and spacious
apartments?"

Ethel shook her head. "It may be the memory of a dream that haunts me,"
she replied, "and not a reality; but I have frequently the image before
me, of having been kissed and caressed by a beautiful lady, very richly
dressed."

Fitzhenry actually started at this reply. "I have often conjectured,"
continued Ethel, "that that lovely vision was my dear mother; and that
when--when you lost her, you despised all the rest of the world, and
exiled yourself to America."

Ethel looked inquiringly at her father as she made this leading remark;
but he in a sharp and tremulous accent repeated the words, "Lost her!"

"Yes," said Ethel, "I mean, is she not lost--did she not die?"

Fitzhenry sighed heavily, and turning his head towards the window on his
side, became absorbed in thought, and Ethel feared to disturb him by
continuing the conversation.

It has not been difficult all along for the reader to imagine, that the
lamented brother of the honourable Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry and the
exile of the Illinois are one; and while father and daughter are
proceeding on their way towards New York, it will be necessary, for the
interpretation of the ensuing pages, to dilate somewhat on the previous
history of the father of our lovely heroine.

It may be remembered, that Henry Fitzhenry was the only son of Admiral
Lord Lodore. He was, from infancy, the pride of his father and the idol of
his sister; and the lives of both were devoted to exertions for his
happiness and well-being. The boy soon became aware of their extravagant
fondness, and could not do less in consequence than fancy himself a
person of considerable importance. The distinction that Lord Lodore's
title and residence bestowed upon Longfield made his son and heir a
demigod among the villagers. As he rode through it on his pony, every
one smiled on him and bowed to him; and the habit of regarding himself
superior to all the world, became too much an habit to afford triumph,
though any circumstances that had lessened his consequence in his own
eyes would have been matter of astonishment and indignation. His
personal beauty was the delight of the women, his agility and hardihood
the topic of the men of the village. For although essentially spoiled,
he was not pampered in luxury. His father, with all his fondness, would
have despised him heartily had he not been inured to hardship, and
rendered careless of it. Rousseau might have passed his approbation upon
his physical education, while his moral nurture was the most
perniciously indulgent. Thus, at the same time, his passions were
fostered, and he possessed none of those habits of effeminacy, which
sometimes stand in the gap, preventing our young self-indulged
aristocracy from rebelling against the restraints of society. Still
generous and brave as was his father, benevolent and pious as was his
sister, Henry Fitzhenry was naturally led to love their virtues, and to
seek their approbation by imitating them. He would not wantonly have
inflicted a pang upon a human being; yet he exerted any power he might
possess to quell the smallest resistance to his desires; and unless when
they were manifested in the most intelligible manner, he scarcely knew
that his fellow-creatures had any feelings at all, except pride and
gladness in serving him, and gratitude when he showed them kindness. Any
poor family visited by rough adversity, any unfortunate child enduring
unjust oppression, he assisted earnestly and with all his heart. He was
courageous as a lion, and, upon occasion, soft-hearted and pitiful; but
once roused to anger by opposition, his eyes darted fire, his little
form swelled, his boyish voice grew big, nor could he be pacified except
by the most entire submission on the part of his antagonist.
Unfortunately for him, submission usually followed any stand made
against his authority, for it was always a contest with an inferior, and
he was never brought into wholesome struggle with an equal.

At the age of thirteen he went to Eton, and here every thing wore an
altered and unpleasing aspect. Here were no servile menials nor humble
friends. He stood one among many--equals, superiors, inferiors, all full
of a sense of their own rights, their own powers; he desired to lead,
and he had no followers; he wished to stand aloof, and his dignity, even
his privacy, was perpetually invaded. His schoolfellows soon discovered
his weakness--it became a bye-word among them, and was the object of
such practical jokes, as seemed to the self-idolizing boy, at once
frightful and disgusting. He had no resource. Did he lay his length
under some favourite tree to dream of home and independence, his
tormentors were at hand with some new invention to rouse and molest him.
He fixed his large dark eyes on them, and he curled his lips in scorn,
trying to awe them by haughtiness and frowns, and shouts of laughter
replied to the concentrated passion of his soul. He poured forth
vehement invective, and hootings were the answer. He had one other
resource, and that in the end proved successful:--a pitched battle or
two elevated him in the eyes of his fellows, and as they began to
respect him, so he grew in better humour with them and with himself. His
good-nature procured him friends, and the sun once more shone unclouded
upon him.

Yet this was not all. He put himself foremost among a troop of wild and
uncivilized school-boys; but he was not of them. His tastes, fostered in
solitude, were at once more manly and dangerous than theirs. He could
not distinguish the nice line drawn by the customs of the place between
a pardonable resistance, or rather evasion of authority, and rebellion
against it; and above all, he could not submit to practise equivocation
and deceit. His first contests were with his school-fellows, his next
were with his masters. He would not stoop to shows of humility, nor tame
a nature accustomed to take pride in daring and independence. He
resented injustice wherever he encountered or fancied it; he equally
spurned it when practised on himself, or defended others when they were
its object--freedom was the watchword of his heart. Freedom from all
trammels, except those of which he was wholly unconscious, imposed on
him by his passions and pride. His good-nature led him to side with the
weak; and he was indignant that his mere fiat did not suffice to raise
them to his own level, or that his representations did not serve to open
the eyes of all around him to the true merits of any disputed question.

He had a friend at school. A youth whose slender frame, fair, effeminate
countenance, and gentle habits, rendered him ridiculous to his fellows,
while an unhappy incapacity to learn his allotted tasks made him in
perpetual disgrace with his masters. The boy was unlike the rest; he had
wild fancies and strange inexplicable ideas. He said he was a mystery to
himself--he was at once so wise and foolish. The mere aspect of a
grammar inspired him with horror, and a kind of delirious stupidity
seized him in the classes; and yet he could discourse with eloquence,
and pored with unceasing delight over books of the abstrusest
philosophy. He seemed incapable of feeling the motives and impulses of
other boys: when they jeered him, he would answer gravely with some
story of a ghastly spectre, and tell wild legends of weird beings, who
roamed through the dark fields by night, or sat wailing by the banks of
streams: was he struck, he smiled and turned away; he would not fag; he
never refused to learn, but could not; he was the scoff, and butt, and
victim, of the whole school.

Fitzhenry stood forward in his behalf, and the face of things was
changed. He insisted that his friend should have the same respect paid
him as himself, and the boys left off tormenting him. When they ceased
to injure, they began to like him, and he had soon a set of friends whom
he solaced with his wild stories and mysterious notions. But his
powerful advocate was unable to advance his cause with his masters, and
the cruelty exercised on him revolted Fitzhenry's generous soul. One
day, he stood forth to expostulate, and to show wherefore Derham should
not be punished for a defect, that was not his fault. He was ordered to
be silent, and he retorted the command with fierceness. As he saw the
slender, bending form of his friend seized to be led to punishment, he
sprang forward to rescue him. This open rebellion astounded every one; a
kind of consternation, which feared to show the gladness it felt,
possessed the boyish subjects of the tyro kingdom. Force conquered;
Fitzhenry was led away; and the masters deliberated what sentence to
pass on him. He saved them from coming to a conclusion by flight.

He hid himself during the day in Windsor Forest, and at night he entered
Eton, and scaling a wall, tapped at the bedroom window of his friend.
"Come," said he, "come with me. Leave these tyrants to eat their own
hearts with rage--my home shall be your home."

Derham embraced him, but would not consent. "My mother," he said, "I
have promised my mother to bear all;" and tears gushed from his large
light blue eyes; "but for her, the green grass of this spring were
growing on my grave. I dare not pain her."

"Be it so," said Fitzhenry; "nevertheless, before the end of a month,
you shall be free. I am leaving this wretched place, where men rule
because they are strong, for my father's house. I never yet asked for a
thing that I ought to have, that it was not granted me. I am a boy here,
there I am a man--and can do as men do. Representations shall be made to
your parents; you shall be taken from school; we shall be free and happy
together this summer at Longfield. Good night; I have far to walk, for
the stage coachmen would be shy of me near Eton; but I shall get to
London on foot, and sleep to-morrow in my father's house. Keep up your
heart, Derham, be a man--this shall not last long; we shall triumph
yet."




CHAPTER VI


What is youth? a dancing billow,
Winds behind, and rocks before!

WORDSWORTH.


This exploit terminated Fitzhenry's career at Eton. A private tutor was
engaged, who resided with the family, for the purpose of preparing him
for college, and at the age of seventeen he was entered at Oxford. He
still continued to cultivate the friendship of Derham. This youth was
the younger son of a rich and aristocratic family, whose hopes and cares
centred in their heir, and who cared little for the comfort of the
younger. Derham had been destined for the sea, and scarcely did his
delicate health, and timid, nervous disposition exempt him from the
common fate of a boy, whose parents did not know what to do with him.
The next idea was to place him in the church; and at last, at his
earnest entreaty, he was permitted to go abroad, to study at one of the
German universities, so to prepare himself, by a familiarity with modern
languages, for diplomacy.

It was singular how well Fitzhenry and his sensitive friend agreed;--the
one looked up with unfeigned admiration--the other felt attracted by a
mingled compassion and respect, that flattered his vanity, and yet
served as excitement and amusement. From Derham, Fitzhenry imbibed in
theory much of that contempt of the world's opinion, and carelessness of
consequences, which was inherent in the one, but was an extraneous graft
on the proud and imperious spirit of the other. Derham looked with calm
yet shy superiority on his fellow-creatures. Yet superiority is not the
word, since he did not feel himself superior to, but different
from--incapable of sympathizing or extracting sympathy, he turned away
with a smile, and pursued his lonely path, thronged with visions and
fancies--while his friend, when he met check or rebuff, would fire up,
his eyes sparkling, his bosom heaving with intolerable indignation.

After two years spent at Oxford, instead of remaining to take his
degree, Fitzhenry made an earnest request to be permitted to visit his
friend, who was then at Jena. It was but anticipating the period for his
travels, and upon his promise to pursue his studies abroad, he won a
somewhat reluctant consent from his father. Once on the continent, the
mania of travelling seized him. He visited Italy, Poland, and Russia: he
bent his wayward steps from north to south, as the whim seized him. He
became of age, and his father earnestly desired his return: but again
and again he solicited permission to remain, from autumn till spring,
and from spring till autumn, until the very flower of his youth seemed
destined to be wasted in aimless rambles, and an intercourse with
foreigners, that must tend to unnationalize him, and to render him unfit
for a career in his own country. Growing accustomed to regulate his own
actions, he changed the tone of request into that of announcing his
intentions. At length, he was summoned home to attend the death-bed of
his father. He paid the last duties to his remains, provided for the
comfortable establishment of his sister in the family mansion at
Longfield, and then informed her of his determination of returning
immediately to Vienna.

During this visit he had appeared to live rather in a dream than in the
actual world. He had mourned for his father; he paid the most
affectionate attentions to his sister; but this formed, as it were, the
surface of things; a mightier impulse ruled his inner mind. His life
seemed to depend upon certain letters which he received; and when the
day had been occupied by business, he passed the night in writing
answers. He was often agitated in the highest degree, almost always
abstracted in reverie. The outward man--the case of Lodore was in
England--his passionate and undisciplined soul was far away, evidently in
the keeping of another.

Elizabeth, sorrowing for the loss of her father, was doubly afflicted
when she heard that it was her brother's intention to quit England
immediately. She had fondly hoped that he would, adorned by his
newly-inherited title, and endowed with the gifts of fortune, step upon
the stage of the world, and shine forth the hero of his age and country.
Her affections, her future prospects, her ambition, were all centred in
him; and it was a bitter pang to feel that the glory of these was to be
eclipsed by the obscurity and distant residence which he preferred.
Accustomed to obedience, and to regard the resolutions of the men about
her, as laws with which she had no right to interfere, she did not
remonstrate, she only wept. Moved by her tears, Lord Lodore made the
immense sacrifice of one month to gratify her, which he spent in reading
and writing letters at Longfield, in pacing the rooms or avenues absorbed
in reverie, or in riding over the most solitary districts, with no object
apparently in view, except that of avoiding his fellow-creatures.
Elizabeth had the happiness of seeing the top of his head as he leant
over his desk in the library, from a little hillock in the garden, which
she sought for the purpose of beholding that blessed vision. She enjoyed
also the pleasure of hearing him pace his room during the greater part
of the night. Sometimes he conversed with her, and then how like a god
he seemed! His extensive acquaintance with men and things, the novel but
choice language in which he clothed his ideas; his vivid descriptions,
his melodious voice, and the exquisite grace of his manner, made him
rise like the planet of day upon her. Too soon her sun set. If ever she
hinted at the prolongation of his stay, he grew moody, and she
discovered with tearful anguish that his favourite ride was towards the
sea, often to the very shore: "I seem half free when I only look upon
the waves," he said; "they remind me that the period of liberty is at
hand, when I shall leave this dull land for----"

A sob from his sister checked his speech, and he repented his
ingratitude. Yet when the promised month had elapsed, he did not defer
his journey a single day: already had he engaged his passage at Harwich.
A fair wind favoured his immediate departure. Elizabeth accompanied him
on board, almost she wished to be asked to sail with him. No word but
that of a kind adieu was uttered by him. She returned to shore, and
watched his lessening sail. Wherefore did he leave his native country?
Wherefore return to reside in lands, whose language, manners, and
religion, were all at variance with his own? These questions occupied
the gentle spinster's thoughts; she had little except such meditations
to vary the hours, as years stole on unobserved, and she continued to
spend her blameless tranquil days in her native village.

The new Lord Lodore was one of those men, not unfrequently met with in the
world, whose early youth is replete with mighty promise; who, as they
advance in life, continue to excite the expectation, the curiosity, and
even the enthusiasm of all around them; but as the sun on a stormy day
now and then glimmers forth, giving us hopes of conquering brightness,
and yet slips down to its evening eclipse without redeeming the pledge;
so do these men present every appearance of one day making a conspicuous
figure, and yet to the end, as it were, they only gild the edges of the
clouds in which they hide themselves, and arrive at the term of life,
the promise of its dawn unfulfilled. Passion, and the consequent
engrossing occupations, usurped the place of laudable ambition and
useful exertion. He wasted his nobler energies upon pursuits which were
mysteries to the world, yet which formed the sum of his existence. It
was not that he was destitute of loftier aspirations. Ambition was the
darling growth of his soul--but weeds and parasites, an unregulated and
unpruned overgrowth, twisted itself around the healthier plant, and
threatened its destruction.

Sometimes he appeared among the English in the capital towns of the
continent, and was always welcomed with delight. His manners were highly
engaging, a little reserved with men, unless they were intimates,
attentive to women, and to them a subject of interest, they scarcely
knew why. A mysterious fair one was spoken of as the cynosure of his
destiny, and some desired to discover his secret, while others would
have been glad to break the spell that bound him to this hidden star.
Often for months he disappeared altogether, and was spoken of as having
secluded himself in some unattainable district of northern Germany,
Poland, or Courland. Yet all these erratic movements were certainly
governed by one law, and that was love;--love unchangeable and intense,
else wherefore was he cold to the attractions of his fair countrywomen?
And why, though he gazed with admiration and interest on the families of
lovely girls, whose successive visitations on the continent strike the
natives with such wonder, why did he not select some distinguished
beauty, with blue eyes, and auburn locks, as the object of his exclusive
admiration? He had often conversed with such with seeming delight; but
he could withdraw from the fascination unharmed and free. Sometimes a
very kind and agreeable mamma contrived half to domesticate him; but
after lounging, and turning over music-books, and teaching steps for a
week, he was gone--a farewell card probably the only token of regret.

Yet he was universally liked, and the ladies were never weary of
auguring the time to be not far off, when he would desire to break the
chains that bound him;--and then--he must marry. He was so quiet, so
domestic, so gentle, that he would make, doubtless, a kind and
affectionate husband. Among Englishmen, he had a friend or two, by
courtesy so called, who were eager for him to return to his native
country, and to enter upon public life. He lent a willing ear to these
persuasions, and appeared annoyed at some secret necessity that
prevented his yielding to them. Once or twice he had said, that his
present mode of life should not last for ever, and that he would come
among them at no distant day. And yet years stole on, and mystery and
obscurity clouded him. He grew grave, almost sombre, and then almost
discontented. Any one habituated to him might have discovered struggles
beneath the additional seriousness of his demeanour--struggles that
promised final emancipation from his long-drawn thraldom.




CHAPTER VII


Men oftentimes prepare a lot,
Which ere it finds them, is not what
Suits with their genuine station.

SHELLEY.


At the age of thirty-two, Lord Lodore returned to England. It was subject
of discussion among his friends, whether this was to be a merely temporary
visit, or whether he was about to establish himself finally in his own
country. Meanwhile, he became the lion of the day. As the reputed slave
of the fair sex, he found favour in their gentle eyes. Even blooming
fifteen saw all that was romantic and winning in his subdued and
graceful manners, and in the melancholy which dwelt in his dark eyes.
The chief fault found with him was, that he was rather taciturn, and
that, from whatever cause, woman had apparently ceased to influence his
soul to love. He avoided intimacies among them, and seemed to regard
them from afar, with observant but passionless eyes. Some spoke of a
spent volcano--others of a fertile valley ravaged by storms, and turned
into a desert; while many cherished the hope of renewing the flame, or
of replanting flowers on the arid soil.

Lord Lodore had just emancipated himself from an influence, which had
become the most grievous slavery, from the moment it had ceased to be a
voluntary servitude. He had broken the ties that had so long held him;
but this had not been done without such difficulties and struggles, as
made freedom less delightful, from the languor and regret that
accompanied victory. Lodore had formed but one resolve, which was not to
entangle himself again in unlawful pursuits, where the better energies
of his mind were to be spent in forging deceptions, and tranquillizing
the mind of a jealous and unhappy woman. He entertained a vague wish to
marry, and to marry one whom his judgment, rather than his love, should
select;--an unwise purpose, good in theory, but very defective in
practice. Besides this new idea of marrying, which he buried as a
profound secret in his own bosom, he wished to accustom himself to the
manners and customs of his own country, so as to enable him to enter
upon public life. He was fond of the country in England, and entered
with zeal upon the pleasures of the chace. He liked the life led at the
seats of the great, and endeavoured to do his part in amusing those
around him.

Yet he did not feel one of them. Above all, he did not feel within him
the charm of life, the glad spirit that looks on each returning day as a
blessing; and which, gilding every common object with its own
brightness, requires no lustre unborrowed from itself. All things palled
upon Lodore. The light laughter and gentle voices of women were vacant of
attraction; his sympathy was not excited by the discussions or pursuits
of men. After striving for a whole year to awaken in himself an interest
for some one person or thing, and finding all to be "vanity,"--towards
the close of a season in town, of extreme brilliancy and variety to
common eyes--of dulness and sameness to his morbid sense, he suddenly
withdrew himself from the haunts of men, and plunging into solitude,
tried to renovate his soul by self-communings, and an intercourse with
silent, but most eloquent, Nature.

Youth wasted; affections sown on sand, barren of return; wealth and
station flung as weeds upon the rocks; a name, whose "gold" was
"o'erdusted" by the inertness of its wearer;--such were the
retrospections that haunted his troubled mind. He envied the ploughboy,
who whistled as he went; and the laborious cottager, who each Saturday
bestowed upon his family the hard-won and scanty earnings of the week.
He pined for an aim in life--a bourne--a necessity, to give zest to his
palled appetite, and excitement to his satiated soul. It seemed to him
that he could hail poverty and care as blessings; and that the dearest
gifts of fortune--youth, health, rank, and riches--were disguised
curses. All these he possessed, and despised. Gnawing discontent;
energy, rebuked and tamed into mere disquietude, for want of a proper
object, preyed upon his soul. Where could a remedy be found? No "green
spot" of delight soothed his memory; no cheering prospect appeared in
view; all was arid, gloomy, unsunned upon.

He had wandered into Wales. He was charmed with the scenery and solitude
about Rhyaider Gowy, in Radnorshire, which lies amidst romantic
mountains, and in immediate vicinity to a cataract of the Wye. He fixed
himself for some months in a convenient mansion, which he found to let,
at a few miles from that place. Here he was secure from unwelcome
visitors, or any communication with the throng he had left. He
corresponded with no one, read no newspapers. He passed his day,
loitering beside waterfalls, clambering the steep mountains, or making
longer excursions on horseback, always directing his course away from
high roads or towns. His past life had been sufficiently interesting to
afford scope for reverie; and as he watched the sunbeams as they climbed
the hills at evening, or the shadows of the clouds as they careered
across the valleys, his heart by turns mourned or rejoiced over its
freedom, and the change that had come over it and stilled its warring
passions.

The only circumstance that in the least entrenched upon his feeling of
entire seclusion, was the mention, not unfrequently made to him, by his
servants, of the "ladies at the farm." The idea of these "ladies" at
first annoyed him; but the humble habitation which they had
chosen--humble to poverty--impressed him with the belief that, however
the "ladies" might awe-strike the Welsh peasantry, he should find in
them nothing that would impress him with the idea of station. Two or
three times, at the distant sight of a bonnet, instead of the Welsh hat,
he had altered his course to avoid the wearer. Once he had suddenly come
on one of these wonders of the mountains: she might have passed for a
very civilized kind of abigail; but, of course, she was one of the
"ladies."

As Lodore was neither a poet nor a student, he began at last to tire of
loneliness. He was a little ashamed when he remembered that he had taken
his present abode for a year: however, he satisfied his conscience by a
resolve to return to it; and began seriously to plan crossing the
country, to visit his sister in Essex. He was, during one of his rides,
deliberating on putting this resolve into execution on the very next
morning, when suddenly he was overtaken by a storm. The valley, through
which his path wound, was narrow, and the gathering clouds over head
made it dark as night; the lightning flashed with peculiar brightness;
and the thunder, loud and bellowing, was re-echoed by the hills, and
reverberated along the sky in terrific pealings. It was more like a
continental storm than any which Lodore had ever witnessed in England,
and imparted to him a sensation of thrilling pleasure; till, as the rain
came down in torrents, he began to think of seeking some shelter, at
least for his horse. Looking round for this, he all at once perceived a
vision of white muslin beneath a ledge of rock, which could but half
protect the gentle wearer: frightened she was, too, as a slight shriek
testified, when a bright flash, succeeded instantaneously by a loud peal
of thunder, bespoke the presence of something like danger. Lodore's
habitual tenderness of nature rendered it no second thought with him to
alight and offer his services; and he was fully repaid when he saw her,
who hailed with gladness a protector, though too frightened to smile, or
scarcely to speak. She was very young, and more beautiful, Lodore was at
once assured, than any thing he had ever before beheld. Her fairness,
increased by the paleness of terror, was even snowy; her hair, scarcely
dark enough for chesnut, too dark for auburn, clustered in rich curls on
her brow; her eyes were dark grey, long, and full of expression, as they
beamed from beneath their deeply-fringed lids. But such description says
little; it was not the form of eye or the brow's arch, correct and
beautiful as these were, in this lovely girl, that imparted her peculiar
attraction; beyond these, there was a radiance, a softness, an angel
look, that rendered her countenance singular in its fascination; an
expression of innocence and sweetness; a pleading gentleness that
desired protection; a glance that subdued, because it renounced all
victory; and this, now animated by fear, quickly excited, in Lodore, the
most ardent desire to re-assure and serve her. She leant, as she stood,
against the rock--now hiding her face with her hands--now turning her
eyes to her stranger companion, as if in appeal or disbelief; while he
again and again protested that there was no danger, and strove to guard
her from the rain, which still descended with violence. The thunder died
away, and the lightning soon ceased to flash, but this continued; and
while the colour revisited the young girl's cheek, and her smiles,
displaying a thousand dimples, lighted up new charms, a fresh uneasiness
sprung up in her of how she could get home. Her _chaussure_, ill-fitted
even for the mountains, could not protect her for a moment from the wet.
Lodore offered his horse, and pledged himself for its quietness, and his
care, if she could contrive to sit in the saddle. He lifted her light
form on to it; but the high-bred animal, beginning a little to prance,
she threw herself off into the arms of her new friend, in a transport of
terror, which Lodore could by no means assuage. What was to be done? He
felt, light as she was, that he could carry her the short half-mile to
her home; but this could not be offered. The rain was now over; and her
only resource was to brave the humid soil in kid slippers. With
considerable difficulty, half the journey was accomplished, when they
met the "lady" whom Lodore had before seen;--really the maid in
attendance, who had come out to seek her young mistress, and to declare
that "my lady" was beside herself with anxiety on her account.

Lodore still insisted on conducting his young charge to her home; and the
next day it was but matter of politeness to call to express his hope that
she had not suffered from her exposure to the weather. He found the lovely
girl, fresh as the morning, with looks all light and sweetness, seated
besides her mother, a lady whose appearance was not so prepossessing,
though adorned with more than the remains of beauty. She at once struck
Lodore as disagreeable and forbidding. Still she was cordial in her
welcome, grateful for his kindness, and so perfectly engrossed by the
thought of, and love for, her child, that Lodore felt his respect and
interest awakened.

An acquaintance, thus begun between the noble recluse and the "ladies of
the farm," proceeded prosperously. A month ago, would not have believed
that he should feel glad at finding two fair off-shoots of London
fashion dwelling so near his retreat; but even if solitude had not
rendered him tolerant, the loveliness of the daughter might well perform
a greater miracle. In the mother, he found good breeding, good nature,
and good sense. He soon became almost domesticated in their rustic
habitation.

Lady Santerre was of humble birth, the daughter of a solicitor of a
country town. She was handsome, and won the heart of Mr. Santerre, then
a minor, who was assisted by her father in the laudable endeavour to
obtain more money than his father allowed him. The young gentleman saw,
loved, and married. His parents were furiously angry, and tried to
illegalize the match; but he confirmed it when he came of age, and a
reconciliation with his family never took place. Mr. Santerre sold
reversions, turned expectations into money, and lived in the world. For
six years, his wife bloomed in the gay parterre of fashionable society,
when her husband's father died. Prosperity was to dawn on this event:
the new Sir John went down to attend his father's funeral; thence to
return to town, to be immersed in recoveries, settlements, and law. He
never returned. Riding across the country to a neighbour, his horse
shyed, reared, and threw him. His head struck against a fragment of
stone: a concussion of the brain ensued; and a fortnight afterwards, he
was enclosed beside his father, in the ancestral vault.

His widow was the mother of a daughter only; and her hopes and prospects
died with her husband. His brother, and heir, might have treated her
better in the sequel; but he was excessively irritated by the variety of
debts, and incumbrances, and lawsuits, he had to deal with. He chose to
consider the wife most to blame, and she and her child were treated as
aliens. He allowed them two hundred a year, and called himself generous.
This was all (for her father was not rich, and had a large family) that
poor Lady Santerre had to depend upon. She struggled on for some little
time, trying to keep up her connexions in the gay world; but poverty is
a tyrant, whose laws are more terrible than those of Draco. Lady
Santerre yielded, retired to Bath, and fixed her hopes on her daughter,
whom she resolved should hereafter make a splendid match. Her excessive
beauty promised to render this scheme feasible; and now that she was
nearly sixteen, her mother began to look forward anxiously. She had
retired to Wales this summer, that, by living with yet stricter economy,
she might be enabled, during the winter, to put her plans into execution
with greater ease.

Lord Lodore became intimate with the mother and daughter, and his
imagination speedily painted both in the most attractive colours. Here was
the very being his heart had pined for--a girl radiant in innocence and
youth, the nursling, so he fancied, of mountains, waterfalls, and solitude;
yet endowed with all the softness and refinement of civilized society. Long
forgotten emotions awoke in his heart, and he gave himself up to the
bewildering feelings that beset him. Every thing was calculated to
excite his interest. The desolate situation of the mother, devoted to
her daughter only, and that daughter fairer than imagination could
paint, young, gentle, blameless, knowing nothing beyond obedience to her
parent, and untaught in the guile of mankind. It was impossible to see
that intelligent and sweet face, and not feel that to be the first to
impress love in the heart which it mirrored, was a destiny which angles
might envy. How proud a part was his, to gift her with rank, fortune,
and all earthly blessings, and to receive in return, gratitude,
tenderness, and unquestioning submission! If love did not, as thus he
reasoned, show itself in the tyrant guise it had formerly assumed in the
heart of Lodore, it was the more welcome a guest. It spoke not of the
miseries of passion, but offered a bright view of lengthened days of
peace and contentedness. He was not a slave at the feet of his mistress,
but he could watch each gesture and catch each sound of her voice, and
say, goodness and beauty are there, and I shall be happy.

He found the lovely girl somewhat ignorant; but white paper to be
written upon at will, is a favourite metaphor among those men who have
described the ideal of a wife. That she had talent beyond what he had
usually found in women, he was delighted to remark. At first she was
reserved and shy. Little accustomed to society, she sat beside her
mother in something of a company attitude; her eyes cast down, her lips
closed. She was never to be found alone, and a _jeune personne_ in France
could scarcely be more retired and tranquil. This accorded better with
Lodore's continental experience, than the ease of English fashionable
girls, and he was pleased. He conversed little with Cornelia until he had
formed his determination, and solicited her mother's consent to their
union. Then they were allowed to walk together, and she gained on him,
as their intimacy increased. She was very lively, witty, and full of
playful fancy. Aware of her own deficiencies in education, she was the
first to laugh at herself, and to make such remarks as showed an
understanding worth all the accomplishments in the world. Lodore now
really found himself in love, and blessed the day that led him from
among the fair daughters of fashion to this child of nature. His wayward
feelings were to change no more--his destiny was fixed. At thirty-four
to marry, to settle into the father of a family, his hopes and wishes
concentrated in a home, adorned by one whose beauty was that of angels,
was a prospect that he dwelt upon each day with renewed satisfaction.
Nothing in after years could disturb his felicity, and the very security
with which he contemplated the future, imparted a calm delight, at once
new and grateful to a heart, weary of storms and struggles, and which,
in finding peace, believed that it possessed the consummation of human
happiness.




CHAPTER VIII


Hopes, what are they? beads of morning
Strung on slender blades of grass,
Or a spider's web adorning,
In a strait and treacherous pass.

WORDSWORTH.


The months of July, August, and September had passed away. Lord Lodore
enjoyed, during the two last, a singularly complacent state of mind. He had
come to Wales with worn-out spirits, a victim to that darker species of
_ennui_, which colours with gloomy tints the future as well as the
present, and is the ministering angel of evil to the rich and
prosperous. He despised himself, contemned his pursuits, and called all
vanity beneath the vivifying sun of heaven. Real misfortunes have worn
the guise of blessings to men so afflicted, but he was withdrawn from
this position, by a being who wore the outward semblance of an angel,
and from whom he felt assured nothing but good could flow.

Cornelia Santerre was lovely, vivacious, witty, and good-humoured; yet
strange to say, her new lover was not rendered happy so much by the
presence of these qualities, as by the promise which they gave for the
future. He loved her; he believed that she would be to the end of his
life a blessing and a delight; yet passion was scarcely roused in his
heart; it was "a sober certainty of waking bliss," and a reasonable
belief in the continuance of this state, that made him, while he loved
her, regard her rather as a benefactress than a mistress.

Benefactress is a strange word to use, especially as her extreme youth
was probably the cause that more intimate sympathies did not unite them,
and why passion entered so slightly into their intercourse. It is
possible, so great was the discrepancy of their age, and consequently of
their feelings and views of life, that Lodore would never have thought of
marrying Cornelia, but that Lady Santerre was at hand to direct the
machinery of the drama. She inspired him with the wish to gift her
angelic child with the worldly advantages which his wife must possess;
to play a god-like part, and to lift into prosperity and happiness, one
who seemed destined by fortune to struggle with adversity. Lady Santerre
was a worldly woman and an oily flatterer; Lodore had been accustomed to
feminine controul, and he yielded with docility to her silken fetters.

The ninth of October was Cornelia's sixteenth birthday, and on it she
became the wife of Lord Lodore. This event took place in the parish church
of Rhyaider Gowy, and it was communicated to "the world" in the newspapers.
Many discussions then arose as to who Miss Santerre could be. "The only
daughter of the late Sir John." The only late Sir John Santerre
remembered, was, in fact, the grandfather of the bride, and the hiatus
in her genealogy, caused by her father's death before he had been known
as a baronet, puzzled every fashionable gossip. The whole affair,
however, had been forgotten, when curiosity was again awakened in the
ensuing month of March, by an announcement in the Morning Post, of the
arrival of the noble pair at Mivart's. Lord Lodore had always rented a
box at the King's Theatre. It had been newly decorated at the beginning
of the season, and on the first Saturday in April all eyes turned
towards it as he entered, having the loveliest, fairest, and most
sylph-like girl, that ever trod dark earth, leaning on his arm. There
was a child-like innocence, a fascinating simplicity, joined to an
expression of vivacity and happiness, in Lady Lodore's countenance,
which impressed at first sight, as being the completion of feminine
beauty. She looked as if no time could touch, no ill stain her; artless
affection and amiable dependence spoke in each graceful gesture. Others
might be beautiful, but there was that in her, which seemed allied to
celestial loveliness.

Such was the prize Lord Lodore had won. The new-married pair took up their
residence in Berkeley-square, and here Lady Santerre joined them, and
took possession of the apartments appropriated to her use, under her
daughter's roof. All appeared bright on the outside, and each seemed
happy in each other. Yet had any one cared to remark, they had perceived
that Lodore looked even more abstracted than before his marriage. They
had seen, that, in the domestic _coterie_, mother and daughter were
familiar friends, sharing each thought and wish, but that Lodore was one
apart, banished, or exiling himself from the dearest blessings of
friendship and love. There might be no concealment, but also there was
no frankness between the pair. Neither practised disguise, but
there was no outpouring of the heart--no "touch of nature,"
which, passing like an electric shock, made their souls one.
An insurmountable barrier stood between Lodore and his happiness--between
his love and his wife's confidence; that this obstacle was a
shadow--undefined--formless--nothing--yet every thing, made it trebly
hateful, and rendered it utterly impossible that it should be removed.

The magician who had raised this ominous phantom, was Lady Santerre. She
was a clever though uneducated woman: perfectly selfish, soured with the
world, yet clinging to it. To make good her second entrance on its
stage, she believed it necessary to preserve unlimited sway over the
plastic mind of her daughter. If she had acted with integrity, her end
had been equally well secured; but unfortunately, she was by nature
framed to prefer the zig-zag to the straight line; added to which, she
was imperious, and could not bear a rival near her throne. From the
first, therefore, she exerted herself to secure her empire over
Cornelia; she spared neither flattery nor artifice; and, well acquainted
as she was with every habit and turn of her daughter's mind, her task
was comparatively easy.

The fair girl had been brought up (ah! how different from the sentiments
which Lodore had thought to find the natural inheritance of the mountain
child!) to view society as the glass by which she was to set her
feelings, and to which to adapt her conduct. She was ignorant,
accustomed to the most frivolous employments, shrinking from any mental
exercise, so that although her natural abilities were great, they lay
dormant, producing neither bud nor blossom, unless such might be called
the elegance of her appearance, and the charm of the softest and most
ingenuous manners in the world. When her husband would have educated her
mind, and withdrawn her from the dangers of dissipation, she looked on
his conduct as tyrannical and cruel. She retreated from his manly
guidance, to the pernicious guardianship of Lady Santerre, and she
sheltered herself at her side, from any effort Lodore might make for her
improvement.

Those who have never experienced a situation of this kind, cannot
understand it; the details appear trivial: there seems wanting but one
effort to push away the flimsy web, which, after all, is rather an
imaginary than real bondage. But the slightest description will bring it
home to those who have known it, and groaned beneath a despotism the more
intolerable, as it could be less defined. Lord Lodore found that he had no
home, no dear single-hearted bosom where he could find sympathy and to
which to impart pleasure. When he entered his drawing-room with gaiety
of spirit to impart some agreeable tidings, to ask his wife's advice, or
to propose some plan, Lady Santerre was ever by her side, with her hard
features and canting falsetto voice, checking at once the kindling
kindness of his soul, and he felt that all that he should say would be
turned from its right road, by some insidious remark, and the words he
was about to speak died upon his lips. When he looked forward through
the day, and would have given the world to have had his wife to himself,
and to have sought, in some drive or excursion, for the pleasant
unreserved converse he sighed for, Lady Santerre must be consulted; and
though she never opposed him, she always carried her point in opposition
to his. His wishes were made light of, and he was left to amuse himself,
and to know that his wife was imbibing the lessons of one, whom he had
learnt to despise and hate.

Lord Lodore cherished an ideal of what he thought a woman ought to be; but
he had no lofty opinion of woman as he had usually found her. He had
believed that the germ of all the excellencies which he esteemed was to
be found in Cornelia, and he found himself mistaken. He had expected to
find truth, clearness of spirit, and complying gentleness, the adorning
qualities of the unsophisticated girl, and he found her the willing
disciple of one whose selfish and artful character was in direct
contradiction to his own. Once or twice at the beginning, he had
attempted to withdraw his wife from this sinister influence, but Lady
Lodore highly resented any effort of this kind, and saw in it an
endeavour to make her neglect her first and dearest duties. Lodore,
angry that the wishes of another should be preferred to his, drew back
with disappointed pride; he disdained to enforce by authority, that
which he thought ought to be yielded to love. The bitter sense of
wounded affections was not to be appeased by knowing that, if he chose,
he could command that, which was worthless in his eyes, except as a
voluntary gift.

And here his error began; he had married one so young, that her
education, even if its foundation had been good, required finishing, and
who as it was, had every thing to learn. During the days of courtship he
had looked forward with pleasure to playing the tutor to his fair
mistress: but a tutor can do nothing without authority, either open or
concealed--a tutor must sacrifice his own pursuits and immediate
pleasures, to study and adapt himself to the disposition of his pupil.
As has been said of those who would acquire power in the state--they
must in some degree follow, if they would lead, and it is by adapting
themselves to the humour of those they would command, that they
establish the law of their own will, or of an apparent necessity. But
Lodore understood nothing of all this. He had been accustomed to be managed
by his mistress; he had been yielding, but it was because she contrived to
make his will her own; otherwise he was imperious: opposition startled
and disconcerted him, and he saw heartlessness in the want of
accommodation and compliance he met at home. He had expected from
Cornelia a girl's clinging fondness, but that was given to her mother;
nor did she feel the womanly tenderness, which sees in her husband the
safeguard from the ills of life, the shield to stand between her and the
world, to ward off its cruelties; a shelter from adversity, a refuge
when tempests were abroad. How could she feel this, who, proud in youth
and triumphant beauty, knew nothing of, and disbelieved the tales which
sages and old women tell of the perils of life? The world looked to her
a velvet strewn walk, canopied from every storm--her husband alone, who
endeavoured to reveal the reality of things to her, and to disturb her
visions, was the source of any sorrow or discomfort. She was buoyed up
by the supercilious arrogance of youth; and while inexperience rendered
her incapable of entering into the feelings of her husband, she
displayed towards him none of that deference, and yielding submission,
which might reasonably have been expected from her youth, but that her
mother was there to claim them for herself, and to inculcate, as far as
she could, that while she was her natural friend, Lodore was her natural
enemy.

He, with strong pride and crushed affections, gave himself up for a
disappointed man. He disdained to struggle with the sinister influence
of his mother-in-law; he did not endeavour to discipline and invigorate
the facile disposition of his bride. He had expected devotion,
attention, love; and he scorned to complain or to war against the
estrangement that grew up between them. If at any time he was impelled
by an overflowing heart to seek his fair wife's side, the eternal
presence of Lady Santerre chilled him at once; and to withdraw her from
this was a task difficult indeed to one who could not forgive the
competition admitted between them. At first he made one or two
endeavours to separate them; but the reception his efforts met with
galled his haughty soul; and while he cherished a deep and passionate
hatred for the cause, he grew to despise the victim of her arts. He
thought that he perceived duplicity, low-thoughted pride, and coldness
of heart, the native growth of the daughter of such a mother. He yielded
her up at once to the world and her parent, and resolved to seek, not
happiness, but occupation elsewhere. He felt the wound deeply, but he
sought no cure; and pride taught him to mask his soreness of spirit by a
studied mildness of manner, which, being joined to cold indifference,
and frequent contradiction, soon begot a considerable degree of
resentment, and even dislike on her part. Her mother's well-applied
flatteries and the adulation of her friends were contrasted with his
half-disguised contempt. The system of society tended to increase their
mutual estrangement. She embarked at once on the stream of fashion; and
her whole time was given up to the engagements and amusements that
flowed in on her on all sides; while he--one other regret added to many
previous ones--one other disappointment in addition to those which
already corroded his heart--bade adieu to every hope of domestic
felicity, and tried to create new interests for himself, seeking, in
public affairs, for food for a mind eager for excitement.




CHAPTER IX


What are fears, but voices airy
Whisp'ring harm, where harm is not?
And deluding the unwary.
Till the fatal bolt is shot?

WORDSWORTH.


Lord Lodore was disgusted at the very threshold of his new purpose. His
long residence abroad prevented his ever acquiring the habit of public
speaking; nor had he the respect for human nature, nor the enthusiasm
for a party or a cause, which is necessary for one who would make a
figure as a statesman. His sensitive disposition, his pride, which, when
excited, verged into arrogance; his uncompromising integrity, his
disdain of most of his associates, his incapacity of yielding obedience,
rendered his short political career one of struggle and mortification.
"And this is life!" he said; "abroad, to mingle with the senseless and
the vulgar; and at home, to find a--wife, who prefers the admiration of
fools, to the love of an honest heart!"

Within a year after her marriage, Lady Lodore gave birth to a daughter.
This circumstance, which naturally tends to draw the parents nearer,
unfortunately in this instance set them further apart. Lady Santerre had
been near, with so many restrictions and so much interference, which
though probably necessary, considering Cornelia's extreme youth, yet
seemed vexatious and impertinent to Lodore. All things appeared to be
permitted, except those which he proposed. A drive, a ride, even a walk
with him, was to be considered fatal; while, at the same time, Lady
Lodore was spending whole nights in heated rooms, and even dancing. Her
confinement was followed by a long illness; the child was nursed by a
stranger, secluded in a distant part of the house; and during her slow
recovery, the young mother seemed scarcely to remember that it existed.
The love for children is a passion often developed most fully in the
second stage of life. Lodore idolized his little offspring, and felt
hurt and angry when his wife, after it had been in her room a minute or
two, on the first approach it made to a squall, ordered it to be taken
away. At the time, in truth, she was reduced to the lowest ebb of
weakness; but Lodore, as men are apt to do, was slow to discern her
physical suffering, while his cheeks burnt with indignation, as she
peevishly repeated the command that his child should go.

When she grew better this was not mended. She was ordered into the
country for air, at a time when the little girl was suffering from some
infantine disorder, and could not be moved. It was left with its nurses,
but Lodore remained also, and rather suffered his wife to travel without
him, so to demonstrate openly, that he thought her treatment of her baby
unmotherly; not that he expressed this sentiment, nor did Lady Lodore
guess at it; she saw only his usual spirit of contradiction and neglect,
in his desertion of her at this period.

The mother pressed with careless lips the downy cheek of the little
cherub, and departed; while Lodore passed most of his time in the child's
apartment, or, turning his library into a nursery, it was continually
with him there. "Here," he thought, "I have something to live for,
something to love. And even though I am not loved in return, my heart's
sacrifice will not be repaid with insolence and contempt." But when the
infant began to show tokens of recognition and affection, when it smiled
and stretched out its little hands on seeing him, and crowed with
innocent pleasure; and still more, when the lisped paternal name fell
from its roseate lips--the father repeated more emphatically, "Here is
something that makes it worth while to have been born--to live!" An
illness of the child overwhelmed him with anxiety and despair. She
recovered; and he thanked God, with a lively emotion of joy, to which he
had long been a stranger.

His affection for his child augmented the annoyance which he derived
from his domestic circle. He had been hitherto sullenly yielding on any
contest; but whatever whim, or whatever plan, he formed with regard to
his daughter, he abided by unmoved, and took pleasure in manifesting his
partiality for her. Lodore was by nature a man of violent and dangerous
passions, add to which, his temper was susceptible to irritability. He
disdained to cope with the undue influence exercised by Lady Santerre
over his wife. He beheld in the latter, a frivolous, childish puppet,
endowed with the usual feminine infirmities--


"The love of pleasure, and the love of sway;"


and destitute of that tact and tenderness of nature which should teach
her where to yield and how to reign. He left her therefore to her own
devices, resolved only that he would not give up a single point relative
to his child, and consequently, according to the weakness of human
nature, ever ready to find fault with and prohibit all her wishes on the
subject.

Cornelia, accustomed to be guided by her mother's watchful artifices,
and to submit to a tyranny which assumed the guise of servitude, felt
only with the feelings implanted by her parent. She was not, like Lady
Santerre, heartless; but cherished pride, the effect of perpetual
misrepresentation, painted her as such. She looked on her husband as a
man essentially selfish--one who, worn out by passion, had married her
to beguile his hours during a visitation of _ennui_, and incapable of the
softness of love or the kindness of friendship. On occasion of his new
conduct with regard to her child, her haughty soul was in arms against
him, and something almost akin to hatred sprung up within her. She
resented his interference; she believed that his object was to deprive
her of the consolation of her daughter's love, and that his chief aim
was to annoy and insult her. She was jealous of her daughter with her
husband, of her husband with her daughter. If by some chance a word or
look passed that might have softened the mutual sentiment of distrust,
the evil genius of the scene was there to freeze again the genial
current; and any approach to kindness, by an inexplicable but certain
result, only tended to place them further apart than before.

Three winters had passed since their marriage, and the third spring was
merging into summer, while they continued in this state of warlike
neutrality. Any slight incident might have destroyed the fictitious
barriers erected by ill-will and guile between them; or, so precarious
was their state, any new event might change petty disagreements into
violent resentment, and prevent their ever entertaining towards each
other those feelings which, but for one fatal influence, would naturally
have had root between them. The third summer was come. They were
spending the commencement of it in London, when circumstances occurred,
unanticipated by either, which changed materially the course of their
domestic arrangements.

Lord Lodore returned home one evening at a little after eleven, from a
dinner-party, and found, as usual, his drawing-room deserted--Lady
Lodore had gone to a ball. He had returned in that humour to moralize,
which we so often bring from society into solitude; and he paced the
empty apartments with impatient step. "Home!--yes, this is my home! I
had hoped that gentle peace and smiling love would be its inmates, that
returning as now, from those who excite my spleen and contempt, one eye
would have lighted up to welcome me, a dear voice have thanked me for my
return. Home! a Tartar beneath his tent--a wild Indian in his hut, may
speak of home--I have none. Where shall I spend the rest of this dull,
deserted evening?"--for it may be supposed that, sharing London habits,
eleven o'clock was to him but an evening hour.

He went into his dressing-room, and casting his eyes on the table, a
revulsion came over him, a sudden shock--for there lay a vision, which
made his breath come thick, and caused the blood to recede to his
heart--a like vision has had the same effect on many, though it took but
the unobtrusive form of a little note--a note, whose fold, whose seal,
whose superscription, were all once so familiar, and now so strange.
Time sensibly rolled back; each event of the last few years was broken
off, as it were, from his life, leaving it as it had been ten years ago.
He seized the note, and then threw it from him. "It is a mere mistake,"
he said aloud, while he felt, even to the marrow of his bones, the
thrill and shudder as of an occurrence beyond the bounds of nature. Yet
still the note lay there, and half as if to undeceive himself, and to
set witchcraft at nought, he again took it up--this time in a less
agitated mood, so that when the well-known impression of a little
foreign coronet on the seal met his eye, he became aware that however
unexpected such a sight might be, it was in the moral course of things,
and he hastily tore open the epistle: it was written in French, and was
very concise. "I arrived in town last night," the writer said; "I and my
son are about to join my husband in Paris. I hear that you are married;
I hope to see you and your lady before I leave London."

After reading these few lines, Lord Lodore remained for a considerable time
lost in thought. He tried to consider what he should do, but his ideas
wandered, as they sadly traced the past, and pictured to him the
present. Never did life appear so vain, so contemptible, so odious a
thing as now, that he was reminded of the passions and sufferings of
former days, which, strewed at his feet like broken glass, might still
wound him, though their charm and their delight could never be renewed.
He did not go out that night; indeed it seemed as if but a minute had
passed, when, lo! morning was pouring her golden summer beams into his
room--when Lady Lodore's carriage drove up; and early sounds in the
streets told him that night was gone and the morrow come.

That same day Lord Lodore requested Cornelia to call with him on a Polish
lady of rank, with whom he had formerly been acquainted, to whom he was
under obligations. They went. And what Lodore felt when he stood with his
lovely wife before her, who for many by-gone years had commanded his
fate, had wound him to her will, through the force of love and woman's
wiles--who he knew could read every latent sentiment of his soul, and
yet towards whom he was resolved now, and for ever in future, to adopt
the reserved manners of a mere acquaintance--what of tremor or pain all
this brought to Lodore's bosom was veiled, at least beyond Cornelia's
penetration, who seldom truly observed him, and who was now occupied by
her new acquaintance.

The lady had passed the bloom of youth, and even mid life; she was
verging on fifty, but she had every appearance of having been
transcendently beautiful. Her dark full oriental eyes still gleamed from
beneath her finely-arched brows, and her black hair, untinged by any
grizzly change, was gathered round her head in such tresses as bespoke
an admirable profusion. Her person was tall and commanding: her manners
were singular, for she mingled so strangely, stateliness and affability,
disdain and sweetness, that she seemed like a princess dispensing the
favour of her smile, or the terror of her frown on her submissive
subjects; her sweetest smiles were for Cornelia, who yet turned from her
to another object, who attracted her more peculiar attention. It was her
son; a youth inheriting all his mother's beauty, added to the
fascination of early manhood, and a frank and ingenuous address, which
his parent could never have possessed.

The party separated, apparently well pleased with each other. Lady Lodore
offered her services, which were frankly accepted; and after an hour
spent together, they appointed to meet again the next day, when the
ladies should drive out together to shop and see sights.

They became not exactly intimate, yet upon familiar terms. There was a
dignity and even a constraint in the Countess Lyzinski's manner that was
a bar to cordiality; but they met daily, and Lady Lodore introduced her new
friend everywhere. The Countess said that motives of curiosity had
induced her to take this country in her way to Paris. Her wealth was
immense, and her rank among the first in her own country. The Russian
ambassador treated her with distinction, so that she gained facile and
agreeable entrance into the highest society. The young Count Casimir was
an universal favourite, but his dearest pleasure was to attend upon Lady
Lodore, who readily offered to school him on his entrance into the
English world. They were pretty exactly the same age; Casimir was
somewhat the junior, yet he looked the elder, while the lady, accustomed
to greater independence, took the lead in their intercourse, and acted
the monitress to her docile scholar.

Lord Lodore looked on, or took a part, in what was passing around him, with
a caprice perfectly unintelligible. With the Countess he was always gentle
and obliging, but reserved. While she treated him with a coldness
resembling disdain, yet whose chiefest demonstration was silence. Lodore
never altered towards her; it was with regard to her son that he
displayed his susceptible temper. He took pains to procure for him every
proper acquaintance; he was forward in directing him; he watched over
his mode of passing his time, he appeared to be interested in every
thing he did, and yet to hate him. His demeanour towards him was morose,
almost insulting. Lodore, usually so forbearing and courteous, would
contradict and silence him, as if he had been a child or a menial. It
required all Casimir's deference for one considerably his senior, to
prevent him from resenting openly this style of treatment; it required
all the fascination of Lady Lodore to persuade him to encounter it a
second time. Once he had complained to her, and she remonstrated with
her husband. His answer was to reprimand her for listening to the
impertinence of the stripling. She coloured angrily, but did not reply.
Cold and polite to each other, the noble pair were not in the habit of
disputing. Lady Santerre guarded against that. Any thing as familiar as
a quarrel might have produced a reconciliation, and with that a better
understanding of each other's real disposition. The disdain that rose in
Cornelia's bosom on this taunt, fostered by conscious innocence, and a
sense of injustice, displayed itself in a scornful smile, and by an
augmentation of kindness towards Casimir. He was now almost domesticated
at her house; he attended her in the morning, hovered round her during
the evening; and she, given up to the desire of pleasing, did not
regard, did not even see, the painful earnestness with which Lord Lodore
regarded them. His apparent jealousy, if she at all remarked it, was but
a new form of selfishness, to which she was not disposed to give
quarter. Yet any unconcerned spectator might have started to observe
how, from an obscure corner of the room, Lodore watched every step they
took, every change of expression of face during their conversation; and
then approaching and interrupting them, endeavoured to carry Count
Casimir away with him; and when thwarted in this, dart glances of such
indignation on the youth, and of scorn upon his wife, as might have
awoke a sense of danger, had either chanced to see the fierce,
lightning-like passions written in those moments on his countenance, as
letters of fire and menace traced upon the prophetic wall.

The Countess appeared to observe him indeed, and sometimes it seemed as
if she regarded the angry workings of his heart with malicious pleasure.
Once or twice she had drawn near, and said a few words in her native
language, on which he endeavoured to stifle each appearance of passion,
answering with a smile, in a low calm voice, and retiring, left, as it
were, the field to her. Lady Santerre also had remarked his glances of
suspicion or fury; they were interpreted into new sins against her
daughter, and made with her the subject of ridicule or bitter reproach.

Lord Lodore was entirely alone. To no one human being could he speak a word
that in the least expressed the violence of his feelings. Perhaps the
only person with whom he felt the least inclined to overflow in
confidence, was the Countess Lyzinski. But he feared her: he feared the
knowledge she possessed of his character, and the power she had once
exercised to rule him absolutely; the barrier between them must be
insuperable, or the worst results would follow: he redoubled his own
cautious reserve, and bore patiently the proud contempt which she
exhibited, resolved not to yield one inch in the war he waged with his
own heart, with regard to her. But he was alone, and the solitude of
sympathy in which he lived, gave force and keenness to all his feelings.
Had they evaporated in words, half their power to wound had been lost;
as it was, there was danger in his meditations, and each one in
collision with him had occasion to dread that any sudden overflow of
stormy rage would be the more violent for having been repressed so long.

One day the whole party, with the exception of Lady Santerre, dined at the
house of the Russian ambassador. As Lord and Lady Lodore proceeded towards
their destination, he, with pointed sarcasm of manner, requested her to
be less marked in her attentions to Count Casimir. The unfounded
suspicions of a lover may please as a proof of love, but those of a
husband, who thus claims affections which he has ceased to endeavour to
win, are never received except as an impertinence and an insult. Those
of Lord Lodore appeared to his haughty wife but a new form of
cold-hearted despotism, checking her pleasures whencesoever they might
arise. She replied by a bitter smile, and afterwards still more
insultingly, by the display of kindness and partiality towards the
object of her husband's dislike. Her complete sense of innocence, roused
to indignation, by the injury she deemed offered to it, led her thus to
sport with feelings, which, had she deigned to remark, she might have
seen working with volcano-power in the breast of Lodore.

The ladies retired after dinner. They gathered together in groups in the
drawing-room, while Lady Lodore, strange to say, sat apart from all. She
placed herself on a distant sopha, apparently occupied by examining
various specimens of bijouterie, nic-nacs of all kinds, which she took
up one after the other, from the table near her. One hand shaded her
eyes as she continued thus to amuse herself. She was not apt to be so
abstracted; as now, that intent on self-examination, or self-reproach,
or on thoughts that wandered to another, she forgot where she was, and
by whom surrounded. She did not observe the early entrance of several
gentlemen from the dining-room, nor remark a kind of embarrassment which
sat upon their features, spreading a sort of uncomfortable wonder among
the guests. The first words that roused her, were addressed to her by
her husband: "Your carriage waits, Cornelia; will you come?"

"So early?" she asked.

"I particularly wish it," he replied.

"You can go, and send them back for me--and yet it is not worth while,
we shall see most of the people here at Lady C----'s to night."

She glanced round the room, Casimir was not there; as she passed the
Countess Lyzinski, she was about to ask her whether they should meet
again that evening, when she caught the lady's eye fixed on her husband,
meeting and returning a look of his. Alarm and disdain were painted on
her face, and added to this, a trace of feeling so peculiar, so full of
mutual understanding, that Lady Lodore was filled with no agreeable emotion
of surprise. She entered the carriage, and the reiterated "Home!" of Lord
Lodore, prevented her intended directions. Both were silent during their
short drive. She sat absorbed in a variety of thoughts, not one of which
led her to enter into conversation with her companion; they were rather
fixed on her mother, on the observations she should make to, and the
conjectures she should share with, her. She became anxious to reach
home, and resolved at once to seek Lady Santerre's advice and directions
by which to regulate her conduct on this occasion.




CHAPTER X


Who then to frail mortality shall trust,
But limns the water, or but writes in dust.

BACON.


They arrived in Berkeley-square. Lady Lodore alighted, and perceived with
something of a beating heart, that her husband followed her, as she
passed on to the inner drawing-room. Lady Santerre was not there. Taking
a letter from the table, so to give herself the appearance of an excuse
for having entered a room she was about immediately to quit, she was
going, when Lodore, who stood hesitating, evidently desirous of
addressing her, and yet uncertain how to begin, stopped her by speaking
her name, "Cornelia!"

She turned--she was annoyed; her conscience whispered what was in all
probability the subject to which her attention was to be called. Her
meditations in the drawing-room of the Russian Ambassador, convinced her
that she had, to use the phrase of the day, flirted too much with Count
Casimir, and she had inwardly resolved to do so no more. It was
particularly disagreeable therefore, that her husband should use
authority, as she feared that he was about to do, and exact from his
wife's obedience, what she was willing to concede to her own sense of
propriety. She was resolved to hear as little as she could on the
subject, and stood as if in haste to go. His faltering voice betrayed
how much he felt, and once or twice it refused to frame the words he
desired to utter: how different was their import from that expected by
his impatient auditress!

"Cornelia," said he, at length, "can you immediately, and at once--this
very night--prepare to quit England?"

"Quit England! Why?--whither?" she exclaimed.

"I scarcely know," replied Lodore, "nor is it of the slightest import. The
world is wide, a shelter, a refuge can be purchased any where--and that
is all I seek."

The gaming table, the turf, loss of fortune, were the ideas naturally
conveyed into the lady's mind by this reply. "Is all--every thing
gone--lost?" she asked.

"My honour is," he answered, with an effort, "and the rest is of little
worth."

He paused, and then continued in a low but distinct voice, as if every
word cost him a struggle, yet as if he wished each one to be fraught
with its entire meaning to his hearer; "I cannot well explain to you the
motives of my sudden determination, nor will I complain of the part you
have had in bringing on this catastrophe. It is over now. No power on
earth--no heavenly power can erase the past, nor change one iota of
what, but an hour ago, did not exist, but which now exists; altering all
things to both of us for ever; I am a dishonoured man."

"Speak without more comment," cried Lady Lodore; "for Heaven's sake
explain--I must know what you mean."

"I have insulted a gentleman," replied her husband, "and I will yield no
reparation. I have disgraced a nobleman by a blow, and I will offer no
apology, could one be accepted--and it could not; nor will I give
satisfaction."

Lady Lodore remained silent. Her thoughts speedily ran over the dire
objects which her husband's speech presented. A quarrel--she too readily
guessed with whom--a blow, a duel; her cheek blanched--yet not so; for
Lodore refused to fight. In spite of the terror with which an anticipated
rencontre had filled her, the idea of cowardice in her husband, or the
mere accusation of it, brought the colour back to her face. She felt
that her heedlessness had given rise to all this harm; but again she
felt insulted that doubts of her sentiments or conduct should be the
occasion of a scene of violence. Both remained silent. Lodore stood
leaning on the mantelpiece, his cheek flushed, agitation betraying
itself in each gesture, mixed with a resolve to command himself.
Cornelia had advanced from the door to the middle of the room; she stood
irresolute, too indignant and too fearful to ask further explanation,
yet anxious to receive it. Still he hesitated. He was desirous of
finding some form of words which might convey all the information that
it was necessary she should receive, and yet conceal all that he desired
should remain untold.

At last he spoke. "It is unnecessary to allude to the irretrievable
past. The future is not less unalterable for me. I will not fight with,
nor apologize to, the boy I have insulted I must therefore fly--fly my
country and the face of man; go where the name of Lodore will not be
synonymous with infamy--to an island in the east--to the desert wilds of
America--it matters not whither. The simple question is, whether you are
prepared on a sudden to accompany me? I would not ask this of your
generosity, but that, married as we are, our destinies are linked, far
beyond any power we possess to sunder them. Miserable as my future
fortunes will be, far other than those which I invited you but four
years ago to share, you are better off incurring the worst with me, than
you could be, struggling alone for a separate existence."

"Pardon me, Lodore," said Cornelia, somewhat subdued by the magnitude of
the crisis brought about, she believed, however involuntarily by herself,
and by the sadness that, as he spoke, filled the dark eyes of her
companion with an expression more melancholy than tears; "pardon me, if
I seek for further explanation. Your antagonist" (they neither of them
ventured to speak a name, which hung on the lips of both) "is a mere
boy. Your refusal to fight with him results of course from this
consideration; while angry, and if I must allude to so distasteful a
falsehood, while unjust suspicion prevent your making him fitting and
most due concessions. Were the occasion less terrible, I might disdain
to assert my own innocence; but as it is, I do most solemnly declare,
that Count Casimir----"

"I ask no question on that point, but simply wish
to know whether you will accompany me," interrupted Lodore, hastily;
"the rest I am sorry for--but it is over. You, my poor girl, though in
some measure the occasion, and altogether the victim, of this disaster,
can exercise no controul over it. No foreign noble would accept the most
humiliating submissions as compensation for a blow, and this urchin
shall never receive from me the shadow of any."

"Is there no other way?" asked Cornelia.

"Not any," replied Lodore, while his agitation increased, and his voice
grew tremulous; "No consideration on earth could arm me against his life.
One other mode there is. I might present myself as a mark for his
vengeance, with a design of not returning his fire, but I am shut out even
from this resource. And this," continued Lodore, losing as he spoke, all
self-command, carried away by the ungovernable passions he had hitherto
suppressed, and regardless, as he strode up and down the room, of
Cornelia, who half terrified had sunk into a chair; "this--these are the
result of my crimes--such, from their consequences, I now term, what by
courtesy I have hitherto named my follies--this is the end! Bringing
into frightful collision those who are bound by sacred ties--changing
natural love into unnatural, deep-rooted, unspeakable hate--arming blood
against kindred blood--and making the innocent a parricide. O Theodora,
what have you not to answer for!"

Lady Lodore started. The image he presented was too detestable. She
repressed her emotions, and assuming that air of disdain, which we are so
apt to adopt to colour more painful feelings, she said, "This sounds very
like a German tragedy, being at once disagreeable and inexplicable."

"It is a tragedy," he replied; "a tragedy brought now to its last dark
catastrophe. Casimir is my son. We may neither of us murder the other;
nor will I, if again brought into contact with him, do other than
chastise the insolent boy. The tiger is roused within me. You have a
part in this."

A flash of anger glanced from Cornelia's eyes. She did not reply--she
rose--she quitted the room--she passed on with apparent composure, till
reaching the door of her mother's chamber, she rushed impetuously in.
Overcome with indignation, panting, choked, she threw herself into her
arms, saying, "Save me!" A violent fit of hysterics followed.

At first Lady Lodore could only speak of the injury and insult she had
herself suffered; and Lady Santerre, who by no means wished to encourage
feelings, which might lead to violence in action, tried to soothe her
irritation. But when allusions to Lodore's intention of quitting England
and the civilized world for ever, mingled with Cornelia's exclamations,
the affair assumed a new aspect in the wary lady's eyes. The barbarity of
such an idea excited her utmost resentment. At once she saw the full
extent of the intended mischief, and the risk she incurred of losing the
reward of years of suffering and labour. When an instantaneous departure
was mentioned, an endless, desolate journey, which it was doubtful
whether she should be admitted to share, to be commenced that very
night, she perceived that her measures to prevent it must be promptly
adopted. The chariot was still waiting which was to have conveyed Lord
and Lady Lodore to their assembly; dressed as she was for this, without
preparation, she hurried her daughter into the carriage, and bade the
coachman drive to a villa they rented at Twickenham; leaving, in
explanation, these few lines addressed to her son-in-law.


"The scene of this evening has had an alarming effect upon Cornelia.
Time will soften the violence of her feelings, but some immediate step
was necessary to save, I verily believe, her life. I take her to
Twickenham, and will endeavour to calm her: until I shall have in some
measure succeeded, I think you had better not follow us; but let us hear
from you; for although my attention is so painfully engrossed by my
daughter's sufferings, I am distressed on your account also, and shall
continue very uneasy until I hear from you.

"_Friday Evening._"


Lady Santerre and her daughter reached Twickenham. Lady Lodore went to bed,
and assisted by a strong composing draught, administered by her mother, her
wrongs and her anger were soon hushed in profound sleep. Night, or
rather morning, was far spent before this occurred, so that it was late
in the afternoon of the ensuing day before she awoke, and recalled to
her memory the various conflicting sentiments which had occupied her
previous to her repose.

During the morning, Lady Santerre had despatched a servant to
Berkeley-square, to summon her daughter's peculiar attendants. He now
brought back the intelligence that Lord Lodore had departed for the
continent, about three hours after his wife had quitted his house. But to
this he added tidings of another circumstance, for which both ladies were
totally unprepared. Cornelia had entered the carriage the preceding
night, without spending one thought on the sleeping cherub in the
nursery. What was her surprise and indignation, when she heard that her
child and its attendant formed a part of his lordship's travelling
suite. The mother's first impulse was to follow her offspring; but this
was speedily exchanged for a bitter sense of wrong, aversion to her
husband, and a resolve not to yield one point, in the open warfare thus
declared by him.




CHAPTER XI


Amid two seas, on one small point of land,
Wearied, uncertain, and amazed, we stand;
On either side our thoughts incessant turn,
Forward we dread, and looking back we mourn.

PRIOR.


Accustomed to obey the more obvious laws of necessity, those whose
situation in life obliges them to earn their daily bread, are already
broken in to the yoke of fate. But the rich and great are vanquished
more slowly. Their time is their own; as fancy bids them, they can go
east, west, north, or south; they wish, and accomplish their wishes; and
cloyed by the too easy attainment of the necessaries, and even of the
pleasures of life, they fly to the tortures of passion, and to the
labour of overcoming the obstacles that stand in the way of their
forbidden desires, as resources against ennui and satiety. Reason is
lost in the appetite for excitement, and a kind of unnatural pleasure
springs from their severest pains, because thus alone are they roused to
a full sense of their faculties; thus alone is existence and its
purposes brought home to them.

In the midst of this, their thoughtless career, the eternal law which
links ill to ill, is at hand to rebuke and tame the rebel spirit; and
such a tissue of pain and evil is woven from their holiday pastime, as
checks them midcourse, and makes them feel that they are slaves. The
young are scarcely aware of this; they delight to contend with Fate, and
laugh as she clanks their chains. But there is a period--sooner or later
comes to all--when the links envelop them, the bolts are shot, the
rivets fixed, the iron enters the flesh, the soul is subdued, and they
fly to religion or proud philosophy, to seek for an alleviation, which
the crushed spirit can no longer draw from its own resources.

This hour! this fatal hour! How many can point to the shadow on the
dial, and say, "Then it was that I felt the whole weight of my humanity,
and knew myself to be the subject of an unvanquishable power!" This dark
moment had arrived for Lodore. He had spent his youth in passion, and
exhausted his better nature in a struggle for, and in the enjoyment of,
pleasure. He found disappointment, and desired change. It came at his
beck. He married. He was not satisfied; but still he felt that it was
because he did not rouse himself, that the bonds sate so heavily upon
him. He was enervated. He sickened at the idea of the struggle it would
require to cast off his fetters, and he preferred adapting his nature to
endure their weight. But he believed that it was only because he did not
raise his hand, nor determine on one true effort, that he was thus
enslaved. And now his hand was raised--the effort made; but no change
ensued; and he felt that there was no escape from the inextricable bonds
that fastened him to misery.

He had believed that he did right in introducing his wife to the
Countess Lyzinski. He felt that he could not neglect this lady; and such
was her rank, that any affectation of a separate acquaintance would
invite those observations which he deprecated. It was, after all, matter
of trivial import that he should be the person to bring them acquainted.
Moving in the same circles, they must meet--they might clash: it was
better that they should be on friendly terms. He did not foresee the
intimacy that ensued; and still less, that his own violent passions
would be called into action. That they were so, was, to the end, a
mystery even to himself. He no longer loved the Countess; and, in the
solitude of his chamber, he often felt his heart yearn towards the noble
youth, her son; but when they met--when Cornelia spent her blandest
smiles upon him, and when the exquisitely beautiful countenance of
Casimir became lighted up with gladness and gratitude, a fire of rage
was kindled in his heart, and he could no more command himself, than can
the soaring flames of a conflagration bend earthward. He felt ashamed;
but new fury sprung from this very sensation. For worlds, he would not
have his frenzy pried into by another; and yet he had no power to
controul its manifestation. His wife expostulated with him concerning
Casimir, and laughed his rebuke to scorn. But she did not read the
tumult of unutterable jealousy and hate, that slept within his breast,
like an earthquake beneath the soil, the day before a city falls.

All tended to add fuel to this unnatural flame. His own exertions to
subdue its fierceness but kindled it anew. Often he entered the same
room with the young Count, believing that he had given his suspicions to
the winds--that he could love him as a son, and rejoice with a father's
pride in the graces of his figure and the noble qualities of his mind.
For a few seconds the fiction endured: he felt a pang--it was
nothing--gone; it would not return again:--another! was he for ever to
be thus tortured? And then a word a look, an appearance of slighting him
on the part of Casimir, an indiscreet smile on Cornelia's lips, would at
once set a-light the whole devastating blaze. The Countess alone had any
power over him; but though he yielded to her influence, he was the more
enraged that she should behold his weakness; and that while he succeeded
in maintaining an elevated impassibility with regard to herself, his
heart, with all its flaws and poverty of purpose, should, through the
ill-timed interference of this boy, be placed once more naked in her
hand.

Such a state of feeling, where passion combated passion, while reason
was forgotten in the strife, was necessarily pregnant with ruin. The only
safety was in flight;--and Lodore would have flown--he would have absented
himself until the cause of his sufferings had departed--but that, more
and more, jealousy entered into his feelings--a jealousy, wound up by
the peculiarity of his situation, into a sensitiveness that bordered on
insanity, which saw guilt in a smile, and overwhelming, hopeless ruin,
in the simplest expression of kindness. Cornelia herself was disinclined
to quit London, and tenacious pride rendered him averse to proposing it,
since he could frame no plausible pretext for his change of purpose, and
it had been previously arranged that they should remain till the end of
July. The presence of the Countess Lyzinski was a tie to keep her; and
to have pleaded his feelings with regard to Casimir, could he have
brought himself so to do, would probably have roused her at once into
rebellion. There was no resource; he must bear, and also he must
forbear;--but the last was beyond his power, and his attempt at the
first brought with it destruction. In the last instance, at the Russian
Ambassador's, irritated by Cornelia's tone of defiance, and subsequent
levity, he levelled a scornful remark at the guiltless and unconscious
offender. Casimir had endured his arrogance and injustice long. He knew
of no tie, no respect due, beyond that which youth owes to maturer
years; yet the natural sweetness of his disposition inclined him to
forbearance, until now, that surrounded by his own countrymen and by
Russians, it became necessary that he should assert himself. He replied
with haughtiness; Lodore rejoined with added insult;--and when again
Casimir retorted, he struck him. The young noble's eyes flashed fire:
several gentlemen interposed between them;--and yielding to the
expediency of the moment, the Pole, with admirable temper, withdrew.

Humiliated and dismayed, but still burning with fury, Lodore saw at once
the consequences of his angry transport. With all the impetuosity of his
fiery spirit, he resolved to quit at once the scene in which he had
played his part so ill. There was no other alternative. The most
frightful crimes blocked up every other outlet: this was his sole
escape, and he must seize on it without delay. Lady Lodore had not even
deigned to answer his request that she should accompany him; and her
mother's note appeared the very refinement of insolence. They abandoned
him. They left the roof from which he was about to exile himself, even
before he had quitted it, as if in fear of contamination during his
brief delay. Thus he construed their retreat; and worked up, as he was,
almost to madness, he considered their departure as the commencement of
that universal ban, which for ever, hereafter, was to accompany his
name. It opened anew the wound his honour had sustained; and he poured
forth a vow never more to ally himself in bonds of love or amity with
one among his kind.

His purpose was settled, and he did not postpone its execution.
Post-horses were ordered, and hasty preparations made, for his
departure. Alone, abandoned, disgraced, in another hour he was to quit
his home, his wife, all that endears existence, for ever: yet the short
interval that preceded his departure hung like a long-drawn day upon him;
and time seemed to make a full stop, at a period when he would have
rejoiced had it leaped many years to come. The heart's prayer in agony
did not avail: he was still kept lingering, when a knocking at the door
announced a visitor, who, at that late hour, could come for one purpose
only. Lord Lodore ordered himself to be denied, and Count Casimir's second
departed to seek him elsewhere. Cold dew-drops stood on Lodore's brow as
he heard this gentleman parley in a foreign accent with the servant;
trying, doubtless, to make out where it was likely that he should meet
with him: the door closed at last, and he listened to the departing
steps of his visitor, who could scarcely have left the square, before
his travelling chariot drove up. And now, while final arrangements were
making, with a heart heavy from bitter self-condemnation, he visited the
couch of his sleeping daughter, once more to gaze on her sweet face, and
for the last time to bestow a father's blessing on her. The early summer
morning was abroad in the sky; and as he opened her curtains, the first
sun-beam played upon her features. He stooped to kiss her little rosy
lips:--"And I leave this spotless being to the blighting influence of
that woman!" His murmurs disturbed the child's slumbers: she woke, and
smiled to see her father; and then insisted upon rising, as he was up,
and it was day.

"But I am come to say good-bye, sweet," he said; "I am going a long
journey."

"O take me with you!" cried the little girl, springing up, and fastening
her arms round his neck. He felt her soft cheek prest to his; her hands
trying to hold fast, and to resist his endeavours to disengage them. His
heart warmed within him. "For a short distance I may indulge myself," he
said, and he thought how her prattle would solace his darker cares,
during his road to Southampton. So, causing her attendant to make speedy
preparation, he took her in the carriage with him; and her infantine
delight so occupied him, that he scarcely remembered his situation, or
what exactly he was doing, as he drove for the last time through the
lightsome and deserted streets of the metropolis.

And now he had quitted these; and the country, in all its summer beauty,
opened around him--meadows and fields with their hedge-rows, tufted
groves crowning the uplands, and "the blue sky bent over all." "From
these they cannot banish me," he thought; "in spite of dishonour and
infamy, the loveliness of nature, and the freedom of my will, still are
mine:--and is this all?"--his child had sunk to sleep, nestled close in
his arms; "Ah! what will these be to me, when I have lost this treasure,
dearest of all?--yet why lose her?" This question, when it first
presented itself to him, he put aside as one that answered itself--to
deprive a mother of her child were barbarity beyond that of
savages;--but again and again it came across him, and he began to reason
with it, and to convince himself that he should be unjust towards
himself in relinquishing this last remaining blessing. His arguments
were false, his conclusions rash and selfish; but of this he was not
aware. Our several minds, in reflecting to our judgments the occurrences
of life, are like mirrors of various shapes and hues, so that we none of
us perceive passing objects with exactly similar optics; and while all
pretend to regulate themselves by the quadrant of justice, the deceptive
medium through which the reality is viewed, causes our ideas of it to be
at once various and false. This is the case in immaterial points; how
much more so, when self-love magnifies, and passion obscures, the glass
through which we look upon others and ourselves. The chief task of the
philosopher is to purify and correct the intellectual prism;--but Lodore
was the reverse of a philosopher; and the more he gazed and considered, the
more imperfect and distorted became his perception.

To act justly by ourselves and others, is the aim of every
well-conditioned mind: for the sight of pain in our fellow-creatures,
and the sense of self-condemnation within ourselves, is fraught with a
pang from which we would willingly escape; and every heart not formed of
the coarsest materials is keenly alive to such emotions. Lodore resolved to
judge calmly, and he reviewed coolly, and weighed (he believed)
impartially, the various merits of the question. He thought of Lady
Santerre's worldliness, her vulgar ambition, her low-born contempt for
all that is noble and elevating in human nature. He thought of
Cornelia's docility to her mother's lessons, her careless disregard of
the nobler duties of life, of her frivolity and unfeeling nature:--then,
almost against his will, his own many excellencies rose before him;--his
lofty aspirations, his self-sacrifice for the good of others, the
affectionateness of his disposition, his mildness, his desire to be just
and kind to all, his willingness to devote every hour of the day, and
every thought of his mind, to the well-bringing-up of his daughter: a
person must be strangely blind who did not perceive that, as far as the
child was concerned, she would be far better off with him.

And then, in another point of view: Lady Lodore had her mother--and she had
the world. She had not only beauty, rank, and wealth; but she had a taste
for enjoying the advantages yielded by these on the common soil of daily
life. He cared for nothing in the wide world--he loved nothing but this
little child. He would willingly exchange for her the far greater
portion of his fortune, which Lady Lodore should enjoy; reserving for
himself such a pittance merely as would suffice for his own and his
daughter's support. He had neither home, nor friends, nor youth, nor
taintless reputation; nor any of all the blessings of life, of which
Cornelia possessed a superabundance. Her child was as nothing in the
midst of these. She had left her without a sigh, even without a thought;
while but to imagine the moment of parting was a dagger to her father's
heart. What a fool he had been to hesitate so long--to hesitate at all!
There she was, this angel of comfort; her little form was cradled in his
arms, he felt her soft breath upon his hand, and the regular heaving of
her bosom responded to the beatings of his own heart; her golden, glossy
hair, her crimsoned cheek, her soft, round limbs;--all this matchless
"bower of flesh," that held in the budding soul, and already expanding
affections of this earthly cherub, was with him. And had he imagined
that he could part with her? Rather would he return to Lady Lodore, to
dishonour, to scenes of hate and of the world's contempt, so that thus
he preserved her: it could not be required of him; but if Cornelia's
heart was animated by a tithe of the fondness that warmed his, she would
not hesitate in her choice; but, discarding every unworthy feeling,
follow her child into the distant and solitary abode he was about to
select.

Thus pacifying his conscience, Lodore came to the conclusion of making his
daughter the partner of his exile. Soon after mid-day, they arrived at
Southampton; a small vessel was on the point of sailing for Havre, and
on board this he hurried. Before he went he gave one hasty retrospective
view to those he was leaving behind--his wife, his sister, the filial
antagonist from whom he was flying; he could readily address himself to
the first of these, when landed on the opposite coast; but as he wished
to keep his destination a secret from the latter, and to prevent, if
possible, his being followed and defied by him, an event still to be
feared, he employed the few remaining minutes, before quitting his
country for ever, in writing a brief letter to the Countess Lyzinski,
which he gave in charge to a servant whom he dismissed, and sent back to
town. And thus he now addressed her, who, in his early life, had been as
the moon to raise the tide of passion, incapable, alas! of controlling
its waves when at the full.


"It is all over: I have fulfilled my part--the rest remains with you. To
prevent the ruin which my folly has brought down, from crushing any but
myself, I quit country, home, good name--all that is dear to man. I do
not complain, nor will I repine. But let the evil, I entreat you, stop
here. Casimir must not follow me; he must not know whither I am gone;
and while he brands his antagonist with the name of coward, he must not
guess that for his sake I endure this stain. I leave it to your prudence
and sagacity to calm or to mislead him, to prevent his suspecting the
truth, or rashly seeking my life. I sacrifice more, far more, than my
heart's blood on his account--let that satisfy even your vengeance.

"I would not write harshly. The dream of life has long been over for me;
it matters not how or where the last sands flow out. I do not blame you
even for this ill-omened journey to England, which could avail you
nothing. Once before we parted for ever, Theodora; but that separation
was as the pastime of children in comparison with the tragic scene we
now enact. A thousand dangers yawn between us, and we shall neither dare
to repass the gulf that divides us. Forget me;--be happy, and forget me!
May Casimir be a blessing to you, and while you glory in his perfections
and prosperity, cast into oblivion every thought of him, who now bids
you an eternal adieu."




CHAPTER XII


Her virtue, like our own, was built
Too much on that indignant fuss,
Hypocrite pride stirs up in us,
To bully out another's guilt.

SHELLEY.


The fifth day after Lord Lodore's departure brought Cornelia a letter from
him. She had spent the interval at Twickenham, surrendering her sorrows
and their consolation to her mother's care; and inspired by her with
deep resentment and angry disdain. The letter she received was dated
Havre: the substance of it was as follows.


"Believe me I am actuated by no selfish considerations, when I ask you
once again to reflect before the Atlantic divides us--probably for ever.
It is for your own sake, your own happiness only, that I ask you to
hesitate. I will not urge your duty to me; the dishonour that has fallen
on me I am most ready to bear alone; mine towards you, as far as present
circumstances permit, I am desirous to fulfil, and this feeling dictates
my present address.

"Consider the solitary years you will pass alone, even though in a
crowd, divided from your husband and your child--your home
desolate--calumny and ill-nature at watch around you--not one protecting
arm stretched over you. Your mother's presence, it is true, will suffice
to prevent your position from being in the least equivocal; but the time
will soon come when you will discover your mistake in her, and find how
unworthy she is of your exclusive affection. I will not urge the
temptations and dangers that will beset you; your pride will, I doubt
not, preserve you from these, yet they will be near you in their worst
shape: you will feel their approaches; you will shudder at their
menaces, you will desire my death, and the faith pledged to me at the
altar will become a chain and a torture to you.

"I can only offer such affection as your sacrifice will deserve to adorn
a lonely and obscure home; rank, society, flatterers, the luxuries of
civilization--all these blessings you must forego. Your lot will be cast
in solitude. The wide forest, the uninhabited plain, will shelter us.
Your husband, your child; in us alone you must view the sum and aim of
your life. I will not use the language of persuasion, but in inviting
you to share my privations, I renew, yet more solemnly, the vows we once
interchanged; and it shall be my care to endeavour to fulfil mine with
more satisfaction to both of us than has until now been the case.

"It is useless to attempt to veil the truth, that hitherto our hearts
have been alienated from each other. The cause is not in ourselves, and
must never again be permitted to influence either of us. If amidst the
avocations of society, the presence of a third person has been
sufficient to place division between us;--if, on the flowery path of our
prosperous life, one fatal interference has strewn thorns and burning
ashes beneath our feet, how much more keenly would this intervention be
felt in the retirement in which we are hereafter to spend our days.--In
the lonely spot to which it will be necessary to contract all our
thoughts and hopes, love must alone reign; or hell itself would be but
pastime in comparison to our ever-renewing and sleepless torments. The
spirit of worldliness, of discord, of paltry pride, must not enter the
paling which is to surround our simple dwelling. Come, attended by
affection, by open-hearted confidence;--come to me--to your child!--you
will find with us peace and mutual love, the true secret of life. All
that can make your mother happy in England, shall be provided with no
niggard hand:--but come alone, Cornelia, my wife!--come, to take
possession of the hearts that are truly yours, and to learn a new
lesson, in a new world, from him who will dedicate himself entirely to
you.

"Alas! I fear that I speak an unknown language, and one that you will
never deign to understand. Still I again implore you to reflect before
you decide. On one point I am firm--I feel that I am in the right--that
every thing depends upon it. Our daughter's guileless heart shall never
be tainted by all that I abhor and despise. For her sake, for yours,
more than for my own, I am as rock upon one question. Do not strive to
move me--it will be useless! Come alone! and ten thousand welcomes and
blessings shall hail your arrival!

"A vessel, in which I have engaged a passage, sails for New York, from
this place, in five days time. You must not delay your decision; but
hasten, if such be your gracious resolve, to join me here.

"If you decide to sacrifice yourself to one who will never repay that
sacrifice, and to the world,--that dreary, pain-haunted jungle,--at
least you shall receive from me all that can render your situation there
prosperous. You shall not complain of want of generosity on my part. I
shall, in my new course of life, require little myself; the remainder of
my fortune shall be at your disposal.

"I need not recommend secrecy to you as to the real motive of my
exile--your own sense of delicacy will dictate reserve and silence. This
letter will be delivered to you by Fenton: he will attend you back here,
or bring me your negative--the seal, I feel assured, of your future
misery. God grant that you choose wisely and well! Adieu."


The heart of Lady Lodore burnt within her bosom as she read these lines.
Haughty and proud, was she to be dictated to thus? and to follow, an
obedient slave, the master that deigned to recall her to his presence,
after he had (so she termed his abrupt departure) deserted her? Her
mother sate by, looking at her with an anxious and inquiring glance, as
she read the letter. She saw the changes of her countenance, as it
expressed anger, scorn, and bitter indignation. She finished--she was
still silent;--how could she show this insulting address to her parent?
Again she seemed to study its contents--to ponder.

Lady Santerre rose--gently she was taking the paper from Cornelia's
hand. "You must not read it," she cried;--"and yet you must;--and thus
one other wrong is heaped upon the many."

Lady Santerre read the letter; silently she perused it--folded
it--placed it on the table. Cornelia looked up at her. "I do not fear
your decision," she said; "you will not abandon a parent, who has
devoted herself to you from your cradle--who lives but for you."

The unhappy girl, unable to resist her mother's appeal, threw herself
into her arms. Even the cold Lady Santerre was moved--tears flowed from
her eyes:--"My dear child!" she exclaimed.

"My dear child!"--the words found an echo in Lady Lodore's bosom;--"I am
never to see my child more!"

"Such is his threat," said her mother, "knowing thus the power he has
over you; but do not fear that it will be accomplished. Lord Lodore's
conduct is guided by no principle--by no deference to the opinion of the
world--by no just or sober motives. He is as full of passion as a
madman, and more vacillating. This is his fancy now--to quit England for
the wilderness, and to torture you into following him. You are as lost
as he, if you yield. A little patience, and all will be right again. He
will soon grow tired of playing the tragic hero on a stage surrounded by
no spectators; he will discover the folly of his conduct; he will
return, and plead for forgiveness, and feel that he is too fortunate in
a wife, who has preserved her own conduct free from censure and remark,
while he has made himself a laughing stock to all. Do not permit
yourself, dear Cornelia, to be baffled in this war of passion with
reason; of jealousy, selfishness, and tyranny, with natural affection, a
child's duty, and the respect you owe to yourself. Even if he remain
away, he will quickly become weary of being accompanied by an infant and
its nurse, and too glad to find that you will still be willing to act
the mother towards his child. Firmness and discretion are the arms you
must use against folly and violence. Yield, and you are the victim of a
despotism without parallel, the slave of a task-master, whose first
commands are gentle, soft, and easy injunctions to desert your mother:
to exile yourself from your country, and to bury yourself alive in some
unheard-of desert, whose name even he does not deign to communicate. All
this would be only too silly and too wild, were it not too wicked and
too cruel. Believe me, my love, trust yourself to my guidance, and all
will be well; Lodore himself will thank, if such thanks be of value, the
prudence and generosity you will display."

Cornelia listened, and was persuaded. Above all, Lady Santerre tried to
impress upon her mind, that Lodore, finding her firm, would give up his
rash schemes, and remain in Europe; that even he had, probably, never
really contemplated crossing the Atlantic. At all events, that she must not
be guided by the resolves, changeable as the moon, of a man governed by no
sane purpose; but that, by showing herself determined, he would be
brought to bend to her will. In this spirit Lady Lodore replied to her
husband's letter. Fenton, Lord Lodore's valet, who had been the bearer,
had left it, and proceeded to London. He returned the day following, to
receive his lady's orders. Cornelia saw him and questioned him. She
heard that Lord Lodore was to dismiss him and all his English servants
before embarking for America, with the exception of the child's nurse,
whom he had promised to send back on his arrival at New York. He had
engaged his passage, and fitted up cabins for his convenience, so that
there could be no doubt of his having finally resolved to emigrate. This
was all he knew; Cornelia gave him her letter, and he departed on the
instant for Southampton.

In giving his wife so short an interval in which to form her
determination, Lodore conceived that her first impulse would be to join her
child, that she would act upon it, and at least come as far as Havre,
though perhaps her mother would accompany her, to claim her daughter,
even if she did not besides foster a hope of changing his resolves.
Lodore had an unacknowledged reserve in his own mind, that if she would
give up her mother, and for a time the world, he would leave the choice
of their exile to her, and relinquish the dreary scheme of emigrating to
America. With these thoughts in his mind, he anxiously awaited each day
the arrival of the packets from England. Each day he hoped to see
Cornelia disembark from one of them; and even though accompanied by Lady
Santerre, he felt that his heart would welcome her. During this
interval, his thoughts had recurred to his home; and imagination had
already begun to paint the memory of that home, in brighter colours than
the reality. Lady Lodore had not been all coldness and alienation; in
spite of dissension, she had been his; her form, graceful as a nymph's,
had met his eyes each morning; her smile, her voice, her light cheering
laugh, had animated and embellished, how many hours during the long
days, grown vacant without her. Cherishing a hope of seeing her again,
he forgot her petulance--her self-will--her love of pleasure; and
remembering only her beauty and her grace, he began, in a lover-like
fashion, to impart to this charming image, a soul in accordance to his
wishes, rather than to the reality. Each day he attended less carefully
to the preparations of his long voyage. Each day he expected her; a
chill came over his heart at each evening's still recurring
disappointment, till hope awoke on the ensuing morning. More than once
he had been on the eve of sailing to England to meet and escort her; a
thousand times he reproached himself for not having made Southampton the
place of meeting, and he was withheld from proceeding thither only by
the fear of missing her. Giving way to these sentiments, the tide of
affection, swelling into passion, rose in his breast. He doubted not
that, ere long, she would arrive, and taxed himself for modes to show
his gratitude and love.

The American vessel was on the point of sailing--it might have gone
without him, he cared not; when on the sixth day Fenton arrived, and put
into his hand Cornelia's letter. This then was the end of his
expectation, this little paper coldly closed in the destruction of his
hopes; yet might it not merely contain a request for delay? There was
something in the servant's manner, that looked not like that; but still,
as soon as the idea crossed him, he tore open the seal. The words were
few, they were conceived in all the spirit of resentment.


"You add insult to cruelty," it said, "but I scorn to complain. The very
condition you make displays the hollowness and deceit of your
proceeding. You well know that I cannot, that I will not, desert my
mother; but by calling on me for this dereliction of all duty and
virtuous affection, you contrive to throw on me the odium of refusing to
accompany you; this is a worthy design, and it is successful.

"I demand my child--restore her to me. It is cruelty beyond compare, to
separate one so young from maternal tenderness and fosterage. By what
right--through what plea, do you rob me of her? The tyranny and dark
jealousy of your vindictive nature display themselves in this act of
unprincipled violence, as well as in your insulting treatment of my
mother. You alone must reign, be feared, be thought of; all others are
to be sacrificed, living victims, at the shrine of your self-love. What
have you done to merit so much devotion? Ask your heart--if it be not
turned to stone, ask it what you have done to compare with the long
years of affection, kindness, and never-ceasing care that my beloved
parent has bestowed on me. I am your wife, Lodore; I bear your name; I will
be true to the vows I have made you, nor will I number the tears you force
me to shed; but my mother's are sacred, and not one falls in vain for
me.

"Give me my child--let the rest be yours--depart in peace! If Heaven
have blessings for the coldly egotistical, the unfeeling despot, may
these blessings be yours; but do not dare to interfere with emotions too
pure, too disinterested for you ever to understand. Give me my child,
and fear neither my interference nor resentment. I am content to be as
dead to you--quite content never to see you more."




CHAPTER XIII

And so farewell; for we will henceforth be
As we had never seen, ne'er more shall see.

HEYWOOD.


Lodore had passed many days upon the sea, on his voyage to America, before
he could in the least calm the bitter emotions to which Cornelia's violent
letter had given birth. He was on the wide Atlantic; the turbid ocean
swelled and roared around him, and heaven, the mansion of the winds,
showed on its horizon an extent of water only. He was cut off from
England, from Europe, for ever; and the vast continents he quitted
dwindled into a span; but still the images of those he left behind dwelt
in his soul, engrossing and filling it. They could no longer personally
taunt nor injure him; but the thought of them, of all that they might
say or do, haunted his mind; it was like an unreal strife of gigantic
shadows beneath dark night, which, when you approach, dwindles into thin
air, but which, contemplated at a distance, fills the hemisphere with
star-reaching heads, and steps that scale mountains. There was a
sleepless tumult in Lodore's heart; it was a waking dream of the most
painful description. Again and again Cornelia assailed him with
reproaches, and Lady Santerre poured out curses upon him; his fancy lent
them words and looks full of menace, hate, and violence. Sometimes the
sighing of the breeze in the shrouds assumed a tone that mocked their
voices; his sleep was disturbed by dreams more painful than his daylight
fancies; and the sense which they imparted of suffering and oppression,
was prolonged throughout the day.

He occasionally felt that he might become mad, and at such moments, the
presence of his child brought consolation and calm; her caresses, her
lisped expressions of affection, her playfulness, her smiles, were
spells to drive away the fantastic reveries that tortured him. He looked
upon her cherub face, and the world, late so full of wretchedness and
ill, assumed brighter hues; the storm was allayed, the dark clouds fled,
sunshine poured forth its beams; by degrees, tender and gentle
sensations crept over his heart; he forgot the angry contentions in
which, in imagination, he had been engaged, and he felt, that alone on
the sea, with this earthly angel of peace near him, he was divided from
every evil, to dwell with tranquillity and love.

To part with her had become impossible. She was all that rendered him
human--that plucked the thorn from his pillow, and poured one mitigating
drop into the bitter draught administered to him.

Cornelia, Casimir, Theodora, his mother-in-law, these were all various
names and shapes of the spirit of evil, sent upon earth to torture him:
but this heavenly sprite could set at nought their machinations and
restore him to the calm and hopes of childhood. Extreme in all things,
Lodore began more than ever to doat upon her and to bind up his life in
her. Yet sometimes his heart softened at the recollection of his wife, of
her extreme youth, and of the natural pang she must feel at being deprived
of her daughter. He figured her pining, and in tears--he remembered that
he had vowed to protect and love her for ever; and that deprived of him,
never more could the soft attentions and sweet language of love soothe
her heart or meet her ear, unattended with a sense of guilt and
degradation. He knew that hereafter she might feel this--hereafter, when
passion might be roused, and he could afford no remedy. Influenced by
such ideas, he wrote to her; many letters he wrote during his voyage,
destroying them one after another, dictated by the varying feelings that
alternately ruled him. Reason and persuasion, authority and tenderness,
reigned by turns in these epistles; they were written with all the
fervour of his ardent soul, and breathed irresistible power. Had some of
these papers met Cornelia's eye, she had assuredly been vanquished; but
fate ordained it otherwise: fate that blindly weaves our web of life,
culling her materials at will, and often wholly refusing to make use of
our own desires and intentions, as forming a part of our destiny.

Lodore arrived at New York, and found, by some chance, letters already
waiting for him there. He had concluded one to his wife full of affection
and kindness, when a letter with the superscription written by Lady
Santerre was delivered to him. It spoke of law proceedings, of eternal
separation, and announced her daughter's resolve to receive no
communication, to read no address, that was not prefaced by the
restoration of her child; it referred him to a solicitor as the medium
of future intercourse. With a bitter laugh Lodore tore to pieces the
eloquent and heart-felt appeal he had been on the point of sending; he
gave up his thoughts to business only; he wrote to his agent, he
arranged for his intended journey; in less than a month he was on his
road to the Illinois.

Thus ended all hope of reconciliation, and Lady Santerre won the day.
She had worked on the least amiable of her daughter's feelings, and
exalted anger into hatred, disapprobation into contempt and aversion.
Soon after Cornelia had dismissed the servant, she felt that she had
acted with too little reflection. Her heart died within her at the idea,
that too truly Lodore might sail away with her child, and leave her widowed
and solitary for ever. Her proud heart knew, on this account, no relenting
towards her husband, the author of these painful feelings, but she
formed the resolve not to lose all without a struggle. She announced her
intention of proceeding to Havre to obtain her daughter. Lady Santerre
could not oppose so natural a proceeding, especially as her
companionship was solicited as in the highest degree necessary. They
arrived at Southampton; the day was tempestuous, the wind contrary. Lady
Santerre was afraid of the water, and their voyage was deferred. On the
evening of the following day, Fenton arrived from Havre. Lord Lodore had
sailed, the stormy waves of the Atlantic were between him and the shores
of England; pursuit were vain; it would be an acknowledgment of defeat
to follow him to America. Cornelia returned to Twickenham, maternal
sorrow contending in her heart with mortified pride, and a keen
resentful sense of injury.

Lady Lodore was nineteen; an age when youth is most arrogant, and most
heedless of the feelings of others. Her beauty and the admiration it
acquired, sate her on the throne of the world, and, to her own imagination,
she looked down like an eastern princess, upon slaves only: her sway she
had believed to be absolute; it was happiness for others to obey. Exalted
by adulation, it was natural that all that lowered her elevation in her own
eyes, should appear impertinent and hateful. She had not learned to feel
with or for others. To act in contradiction to her wishes was a crime
beyond compare, and her soul was in arms to resent the insolence which
thus assailed her majesty of will. The act of Lodore, stepping beyond
common-place opposition into injury and wrong, found no mitigating
excuses in her heart. No gentle return of love, no compassion for the
unhappy exile--no generous desire to diminish the sufferings of one, who
was the victim of the wildest and most tormenting passions, softened her
bosom. She was injured, insulted, despised, and her swelling soul was
incapable of any second emotion to the scorn and hate with which she
visited the author of her degradation. She was to become the theme of
the world's discourse, of its ill-natured censure or mortifying pity. In
whatever light she viewed her present position, it was full of annoyance
and humiliation; her path was traced through a maze of pointed angles,
that pained her at every turn, and her reflections magnifying the
imprudence of which she accused herself, suggested no excuse for her
husband, but caused her wounds to fester and burn. Cornelia was not of a
lachrymose disposition; she was a woman who in Sparta had formed an
heroine; who in periods of war and revolution, would unflinchingly have
met calamity, sustaining and leading her own sex. But through the bad
education she had received, and her extreme youth, elevation of feeling
degenerated into mere personal pride, and heroism was turned into
obstinacy; she had been capable of the most admirable self-sacrifice,
had she been taught the right shrine at which to devote herself; but her
mind was narrowed by the mode of her bringing up, and her loftiest ideas
were centered in worldly advantages the most worthless and pitiable. To
defraud her of these, was to deprive her of all that rendered life worth
preserving.

Lady Santerre soothed, flattered, and directed her. She poured the balm
of gratified vanity upon injured pride. She bade her expect speedy
repentance from her husband, and impressed her with the idea, that if
she were firm, he must yield. His present blustering prognosticated a
speedy calm, when he would regret all that he had done, and seek, by
entire submission, to win back his wife. Any appearance of concession on
her part would spoil all. Cornelia's eyes flashed fire at the word.
Concession! and to whom? To him who had wronged and insulted her? She
readily gave into her mother's hands the management of all future
intercourse with him, reserving alone, for her own satisfaction, an
absolute resolve never to forgive.

The correspondence that ensued, carried on across the Atlantic, and soon
with many miles of continent added to the space, only produced an
interchange of letters written with cool insolence on one side, with
heart-burning and impatience on the other. Each served to widen the
breach. When Cornelia was not awakened to resent for herself, she took up
arms on her mother's account. When Lodore blamed her for being the puppet
of one incapable of any generous feeling, one dedicated to the vulgar
worship of Mammon, she repelled the taunt, and denied the servitude of
soul of which she was accused; she declared that every virtue was
enlisted on her mother's side, and that she would abide by her for ever.
In truth, she loved her the more for Lodore's hatred, and Lady Santerre
spared no pains to impress her with the belief, that she was wholly
devoted to her.

Thus years passed away. At first Lady Lodore had lived in some degree of
retirement, but persuaded again to emerge, she soon entered into the
very thickest maze of society. Her fortune was sufficient to command a
respectable station, her beauty gained her partizans, her untainted
reputation secured her position in the world. Attractive as she was, she
was so entirely and proudly correct, that even the women were not afraid
of her. All her intimate associates were people whose rank gave weight
and brilliancy to her situation, but who were conspicuous for their
domestic virtues. She was looked upon as an injured and deserted wife,
whose propriety of conduct was the more admirable from the difficulties
with which she was surrounded; she became more than ever the fashion,
and years glided on, as from season to season she shone a bright star
among many luminaries, improving in charms and grace, as knowledge of
the world and the desire of pleasing were added to her natural
attractions.

The stories at first in circulation on Lodore's departure, all sufficiently
wide from the truth, were half forgotten, and served merely as an
obscure substratum for Cornelia's bright reputation. He was gone: he
could no longer injure nor benefit any, and was therefore no longer an
object of fear or love. The most charitable construction put upon his
conduct was, that he was mad, and it was piously observed, that his
removal from this world would be a blessing. Lady Santerre triumphed.
Withering away in unhonoured age, still she appeared in the halls of the
great, and played the part of Cerberus in her daughter's drawing-room.
Lady Lodore, beautiful and admired, intoxicated with this sort of
prosperity, untouched by passion, unharmed by the temptations that
surrounded her, believed that life was spent most worthily in following
the routine observed by those about her, and securing the privilege of
being exclusive. She was the glass of fashion--the imitated by a vast
sect of imitators. The deprivation of her child was the sole cloud that
came between her and the sun. In despite of herself, she never saw a
little cherub with rosy cheeks and golden hair, but her heart was
visited by a pang; and in her dreams she often beheld, instead of the
image of the gay saloons in which she spent her evenings, a desert
wild--a solitary home--and tiny footsteps on the dewy grass, guiding her
to her baby daughter, whose soft cooings, remembered during absence,
were agonizing to her. She awoke, and vowed her soul to hatred of the
author of her sufferings--the cruel-hearted, insolent Lodore; and then
fled to pleasure as the means of banishing these sad and disturbing
emotions. She never again saw Casimir. Long before she re-appeared in
the world, he and his mother had quitted England. Taught by the slight
tinge of weakness that had mingled with her intercourse with him, she
sedulously avoided like trials in future; and placing her happiness in
universal applause, love saw her set his power at nought, and pride
become a more impenetrable shield than wisdom.




CHAPTER XIV


Time and Change together take their flight.

L. E. L.


Fitzhenry and his daughter travelled for many days in rain and sunshine,
across the vast plains of America. Conversation beguiled the way, and
Ethel, delighted by the novelty and variety of all she saw, often felt
as if springing from her seat with a new sense of excitement and
gladness. So much do the young love change, that we have often thought
it the dispensation of the Creator, to show that we are formed, at a
certain age, to quit the parental roof, like the patriarch, to seek some
new abode where to pitch our tents, and pasture our flocks. The clear
soft eyes of the fair girl glistened with pleasure at each picturesque
view, each change of earth and sky, each new aspect of civilization and
its results, as they were presented to her.

Fitzhenry--or as he approaches the old world, so long deserted by him, he
may resume his title--Lord Lodore had quitted his abode in the Illinois
upon the spur of the moment; he had left his peaceful dwelling impatiently,
and in haste, giving himself no time for second thoughts--scarcely for
recollection. As the fever of his mind subsided, he saw no cause to
repent his proceeding, and yet he began to look forward with an anxious
and foreboding mind. He had become aware that the village of the
Illinois was not the scene fitted for the development of his daughter's
first social feelings, and that he ought to take her among the educated
and refined, to give her a chance for happiness. A Gertrude or an
Haidée, brought up in the wilds, innocent and free, and bestowing the
treasure of their hearts on some accomplished stranger, brought on
purpose to realize the ideal of their dreamy existences, is a picture of
beauty, that requires a miracle to change into an actual event in life;
and that one so pure, so guileless, and so inexperienced as Ethel,
should, in sheer ignorance, give her affections away unworthily, was a
danger to be avoided beyond all others. Whitelock had performed the part
of the wandering stranger, but he was ill-fitted for it; and Lodore's
first idea was to hurry his daughter away before she should invest him,
or any other, with attributes of glory, drawn from her own imagination
and sensibility, wholly beyond his merits.

This was done. Father and daughter were on their way to New York, having
bid an eternal adieu to the savannas and forests of the west. For a time,
Lodore's thoughts were haunted by the image of the home they had left.
The murmuring of its stream was in his ears, the shape of each distant
hill, the grouping of the trees, surrounding the wide-spread prairie,
the winding pathway and trellised arbour were before his eyes, and he
thought of the changes that the seasons would operate around, and of his
future plans unfulfilled, as any home-bred farmer might, when his lease
was out, and he was forced to remove to another county.

As their steps drew near the city which was their destination, these
recollections became fainter, and, except in discourse with Ethel, when
their talk usually recurred to the prairie, and their late home, he
began to anticipate the future, and to reflect upon the results of his
present journey.

Whither was he about to go? To England? What reception should he there
meet? and under what auspices introduce his child to her native country?
There was a stain upon his reputation that no future conduct could
efface. The name of Lodore was a by-word and a mark for scorn; it was
introduced with a sneer, followed by calumny and rebuke. It could not
even be forgotten. His wife had remained to keep alive the censure or
derision attached to it. He, it is true, might have ceased to live in
the memories of any. He did not imagine that his idea ever recurred to
the thoughtless throng, whose very name and identity were changed by the
lapse of twelve years. But when it was mentioned, when he should awaken
the forgotten sound by his presence, the echo of shame linked to it
would awaken also; the love of a sensation so rife among the wealthy and
idle, must swell the sound, and Ethel would be led on the world's stage
by one who was the object of its opprobrium.

What then should he do? Solicit Lady Lodore to receive and bring out her
daughter? Deprive himself of her society; and after having guarded her
unassailed infancy, desert her side at the moment when dangers grew
thick, and her mother's example would operate most detrimentally on her?
He thought of his sister, with whom he kept up a regular though
infrequent correspondence. She was ill fitted to guide a young beauty on
a path which she had never trod. He thought of France, Italy, and
Germany, and how he might travel about with her during the two or three
succeeding years, enlarging and storing her mind, and protracting the
happy light-hearted years of youth. His own experience on the continent
would facilitate this plan; and though it presented, even on this very
account, a variety of objections, it was that to which he felt most
attracted.

There was yet another--another image and another prospect to which he
turned with a kind of gasping sensation, which was now a shrinking
aversion to--now an ardent desire for, its fulfilment. This was the
project of a reconciliation with Cornelia, and that they should
henceforth unite in their labours to render each other and their child
happy.

Twelve years had passed since their separation: twelve years, which had
led him from the prime of life to its decline--which forced Cornelia to
number, instead of nineteen, more than thirty years--bringing her from
crude youth to fullest maturity. What changes might not time have
operated in her mind! Latterly no intercourse had passed between them,
they were as dead to each other; and yet the fact of the existence of
either was a paramount law with both, ruling their actions and
preventing them from forming any new tie. Cornelia might be tired of
independence, have discovered the hollowness of her mother's system, and
desire, but that pride prevented her, a reunion with her long-exiled
husband. Her understanding was good; intercourse with the world had
probably operated to cultivate and enlarge it--maternal love might reign
in full force, causing her heart to yearn towards the blooming Ethel,
and a thousand untold sorrows might make her regard the affection of her
child's father, as the prop, the shelter, the haven, where to find
peace, if not happiness.

And yet Cornelia was still young, still beautiful, still admired: he was
on the wane--a healthy life had preserved the uprightness of his form
and the spring of his limbs; but his countenance, how changed from the
Lodore who pledged his faith to her in the rustic church at Rhyaider Gowy!
The melting softness of his dark eyes was altered to mere sadness--his
brow, from which the hair had retreated, was delved by a thousand lines;
grey sprinkled his black hair,--a wintry morning stealing drearily upon
night--each year had left its trace, and with no Praxitelean hand,
engraven lines upon the rounded cheek, and sunk and diminished the full
eye. Twelve years had scarcely operated so great a change as here
described; but thus he painted it to himself, exaggerating and deforming
the image his mirror presented--and where others had only marked the
indications of a thoughtful mind, and the traces of over-wrought
sensibility, he beheld careful furrows and age-worn wrinkles.

And was he thus to claim the beautiful, the courted--she who still
reigned supreme on Love's own throne? and to whom, so had he been told,
time had brought increased charms as its gift, strewing roses and
fragrance on her lovely head, so proving that neither grief nor passion
had disturbed the proud serenity of her heart.

Lodore had lived many years the life of a recluse, having given up
ambition, hope, almost life itself, inasmuch as that existence is scarcely
to be termed life, which does not bring us into intimate connexion with our
fellow-creatures, nor develope in its progress some plan of present
action or anticipation for the future. He was roused from his lethargy
as he approached peopled cities; a desire to mingle again in human
affairs was awakened, together with an impatience under the obscurity to
which he had condemned himself. He grew at last to despise his
supineness, which had prevented him from struggling with and vanquishing
his adverse fortunes. He resolved no longer to be weighed down by the
fear of obloquy, while he was conscious of the bravery and determination
of his soul, and with what lofty indignation he was prepared to sweep
away the stigma attached to him, and to assert the brightness of his
honour. This, for his daughter's sake, as well as for his own, he
determined to do.

He had no wish, however, to enter upon the task in America. His native
country must be the scene of his exertions, as to re-assert himself
among his countrymen was their object. He felt, also, that, from the
beginning, he must take no false step; and it behoved him fully to
understand the state of things in England as regarded him, before he
presented himself. He delayed his voyage, therefore, till he had
exchanged letters with Europe. He wrote to his sister, immediately on
arriving at New York, asking for intelligence concerning Lady Lodore; and
communicating his intention to return immediately, and, if possible, to
effect a reconciliation with his estranged wife. He besought an
immediate reply, as he did not wish to defer his voyage beyond the
spring months.

Having sent this letter, he gave himself up to the society of his
daughter. He occupied himself by endeavouring to form her for the new
scenes on which she was about to enter, and to divest her of the first
raw astonishment excited by the contrast formed by the busy, commercial
eastern, with the majestic tranquillity of the western portion of the
new world. He wished to accustom her to mingle with her fellow-creatures
with ease and dignity; and he sought to enlarge her mind, and to excite
her curiosity, by introducing her to the effects of civilization. He
would willingly have formed acquaintances for her sake, but that such a
circumstance might interfere with the incognito he meant to preserve
while away from his native country. We can never divest ourselves of our
identity and consciousness, and are apt to fancy that others are equally
alive to our peculiar individuality. It was not probable that the name
of Lodore, or of Fitzhenry, should be known in New York; but as the title
had been bestowed as a reward for victories obtained over the Americans, he
who bore it was less to be blamed for fancying that they had heard with
pleasure the story of his disgrace, and would be ready to visit his
fault with malignant severity.

An accident, however, brought him into contact with an English lady, and
he gladly availed himself of this opportunity to bring Ethel into the
society of her country people. One day he received an elegant little
note, such as are written in London by the fashionable and the fair,
which, with many apologies, contained a request. The writer had heard
that he was about to return to England with his daughter. Would he
refuse to take under his charge a young lady, who was desirous of
returning thither? The distance from their native land drew English
people together, and usually made them kindly disposed towards each
other. The circumstances under which this request was made were
peculiar; and if he would call to hear them explained, his interest
would be excited, and he would not refuse a favour which would lay the
writer under the deepest obligation.

Lodore answered this application in person. He found an English family
residing in one of the best streets of New York, and was introduced to the
lady who had addressed him. Her story, the occasion of her request, was
detailed without reserve. Her husband's family had formerly been
American royalists, refugees in England, where they had lived poor and
forgotten. A brother of his father had remained behind in the new
country, and acquired a large fortune. He had lived to extreme old age;
and dying childless, left his wealth to his English nephew, upon
condition that he settled in America. This had caused their emigration.
While in England, they had lived at Bath, and been intimate with a
clergyman, who resided near. This clergyman was a singular man--a
recluse, and a student--a man of ardent soul, held down by a timid,
nervous disposition. He was an outcast from his family, which was
wealthy and of good station, on account of having formed a mes-alliance.
How indeed he could have married his unequal partner was matter of
excessive wonder. She was illiterate and vulgar--coarse-minded, though
good-natured. This ill-matched pair had two daughters;--one, the
younger, now about fourteen years old, was the person whom it was
desired to commit to Lodore's protection.

The lady continued:--She had a large family of boys, and but one girl,
of the age of Fanny Derham;--they had been for some years companions and
friends. When about to emigrate, she believed that she should benefit
equally her daughter and her friend, if she made the latter a companion
in their emigration. With great reluctance, Mr. Derham had consented to
part with his child: he had thought it for her good, and he had let her
go. Fanny obeyed her father. She manifested no disinclination to the
plan; and it seemed as if the benevolent wishes of Mrs. Greville were
fulfilled for the benefit of all. They had been in America nearly a
year, and now Fanny was to return. She herself had borne her absence
from her father with fortitude: yet it required an exertion of fortitude
to bear it, which was destroying the natural vivacity of her
disposition. Gloom gathered over her mind; she fled society; she sought
solitude; and spent day after day in reverie. Mrs. Greville strove to
rouse her, and Fanny lent herself with good grace to any exertion
demanded of her; yet it was plain, that even when she gave herself most
up to her desire to please her hostess, her thoughts were far away, her
eye was tracing the invisible outline of objects divided from her by the
ocean; and her inmost sense was absorbed by the recollection of one far
distant; while her ear and voice were abstractedly lent to those
immediately around her. Mrs. Greville endeavoured vainly to amuse and
distract her thoughts. The only pleasure which attracted her young mind
was study--a deep and unremitted application to those profound
acquirements, to the knowledge of which her father had introduced her.

"When you know my young friend," continued Mrs. Greville, "you will
understand the force of character which renders her unlike every other
child. Fanny never was a child. Mrs. Derham and her daughter Sarah
bustled through the business of life--of the farm and the house; while
it devolved on Fanny to attend to, to wait upon, her father. She was his
pupil--he her care. The relation of parent and child subsisted between
them, on a different footing than in ordinary cases. Fanny nursed her
father, watched over his health and humours, with the tenderness and
indulgence of a mother; while he instructed her in the dead languages,
and other sorts of abstruse learning, which seldom make a part of a
girl's education. Fanny, to use her own singular language, loves
philosophy, and pants after knowledge, and indulges in a thousand
Platonic dreams, which I know nothing about; and this mysterious and
fanciful learning she has dwelt upon with tenfold fervour since her
arrival in America.

"The contrast," continued Mrs. Greville, "between this wonderful, but
strange girl, and her parent, is apparent in nothing more than the
incident that made me have recourse to your kindness. Fanny pined for
home, and her father. The very air of America was distasteful to her--we
were not congenial companions. But she never expressed discontent. As
much as she could, she shut herself up in the world of her own mind; but
outwardly, she was cheerful and uncomplaining. A week ago we had letters
from her parents, requesting her immediate return. Mr. Derham wasted
away without her; his health was seriously injured by what, in feminine
dialect, is called fretting; and both he and her mother have implored me
to send her back to them without delay."

Lord Lodore listened with breathless interest, asking now and then such
questions as drew on Mrs. Greville to further explanation. He soon
became convinced that he was called upon to do this act of kindness for
the daughter of his former school-fellow--for Francis Derham, whom he
had not known nor seen since they had exchanged the visions of boyhood
for the disappointing realities of maturer age. And this was Derham's
fate!--poor, mis-matched, destroyed by a morbid sensibility, an object
of pity to his own young child, yet adored by her as the gentlest and
wisest of men. How different--and yet how similar--the destinies of
both! It warmed the heart of Lodore to think that he should renew his
boyish intimacy. Derham would not reject him--would not participate in
the world's blind scorn: in his bosom no harsh nor unjust feeling could
have place; his simple, warm heart would yearn towards him as of yore;
and the school-fellows become again all the world to each other.

After this explanation, Mrs. Greville introduced her young friend. Her
resemblance to her father was at first sight remarkable, and awoke with
greater keenness the roused sensibility of Lodore. She was pale and fair;
her light, golden hair clustered in short ringlets over her small,
well-formed head, leaving unshaded a high forehead, clear as opening
day. Her blue eyes were remarkably light and penetrating, with defined
and straight brows. Intelligence, or rather understanding, reigned in
every feature; independence of thought, and firmness, spoke in every
gesture. She was a mere child in form and mien--even in her expressions;
but within her was discernible an embryo of power, and a grandeur of
soul, not to be mistaken. Simplicity and equability of temper were her
characteristics: these smoothed the ruggedness which the singularity of
her character might otherwise have engendered.

Lodore rejoiced in the strange accident that gave such a companion to his
daughter. Nothing could be in stronger contrast than these two
girls;--the fairy form, the romantic and yielding sweetness of Ethel,
whose clinging affections formed her whole world,--with the studious and
abstracted disciple of ancient learning. Notwithstanding this want of
similarity, they soon became mutually attached. Lodore was a link
between them. He excited Ethel to admire the concentrated and
independent spirit of her new friend; and entered into conversation with
Fanny on ancient philosophy, which was unintelligible and mysterious to
Ethel. The three became inseparable: they prolonged their excursions in
the neighbouring country; while each enjoyed peculiar pleasures in the
friendship and sympathy of their companions.

This addition to their society, and an intimacy cultivated with Mrs.
Greville, whose husband was absent at Washington, formed, as it were, a
weaning time for Lodore, from the seclusion of the Illinois. There he had
lived, cut off from the past and the future, existing in the present
only. He had been happy there; cured of the wounds which had penetrated
his heart so deeply, through the ministration of all-healing nature. He
felt the gliding of the hours as a blessing; and the occupations of each
day were replete with calm enjoyment. He thought of England, as a seaman
newly saved from a wreck would of the tempestuous ocean, with fear and
loathing, and with heart-felt gladness that he was no longer the sport
of its waves. He cultivated such a philosophic turn of mind as often
brought a smile of self-pity on his lips, at the recollection of scenes
which, during their passage, had provoked bitter and burning sensations.
What was all this strife of passion, this eager struggle for something,
he knew not what, to him now? The healthy labours of his farm, the
tranquillity of his library, the endearing caresses of his child, were
worth all the vanities of life.

Thus he had felt in the Illinois; and now again he looked back to his
undisturbed life there, wondering how he had endured its monotonous
loneliness. A desire for action, for mingling with his fellow-men, had
arisen in his heart. He felt like a strong swimmer, who longs to battle
with the waves. He desired to feel and to exert his powers, to fill a
space in the eyes of others, to re-assert himself in their esteem, or to
resent their scorn. He could no longer regard the past with
imperturbability. Again his passions were roused, as he thought of his
mother-in-law, of his wife, and of the strange scenes which had preceded
and caused his flight from England. These ideas had long occupied his
mind, without occasioning any emotion. But now again they were full of
interest; and pain and struggle again resulted from the recollection. At
such times he was glad that Ethel had a companion, that he might leave
her and wander alone. He became a prey to the same violence of passion,
the same sense of injury and stinging hurry of thought, which for twelve
years had ceased to torture him. But no tincture of cowardice entered
into his sensations. His soul was set upon victory over the evil fortune
to which he had so long submitted. When he thought of returning to
England, from which he had fled with dishonour, his cheek tingled as a
thousand images of insult and contumely passed rapidly through his mind,
as likely to visit him. His heart swelled within him--his very soul grew
faint; but instead of desiring to fly the anticipated opprobrium, he
longed to meet it and to wash out shame, if need were, with his life's
blood; and, by resolution and daring, to silence his enemies, and redeem
his name from obloquy.

One day, occupied by such thoughts, he stood watching that vast and
celebrated cataract, whose everlasting and impetuous flow mirrored the
dauntless but rash energy of his own soul. A vague desire of plunging
into the whirl of waters agitated him. His existence appeared to be a
blot in the creation; his hopes, and fears, and resolves, a worthless
web of ill-assorted ideas, best swept away at once from the creation.
Suddenly his eye caught the little figure of Fanny Derham, standing on a
rock not far distant, her meaning eyes fixed on him. The thunder of the
waters prevented speech; but as he drew near her, he saw that she had a
paper in her hand. She held it out to him; a blush mantled over her
usually pale countenance as he took it; and she sprung away up the rocky
pathway.

Lodore cast his eyes on the open letter, and his own name, half forgotten
by him, presented itself on the written page. The letter was from Fanny's
father--from Derham, his friend and school-fellow. His heart beat fast
as he read the words traced by one formerly so dear. "The beloved name
of Fitzhenry"--thus Derham had written--"awakens a strange conjecture.
Is not your kind protector, the friend and companion of my boyish days?
Is it not the long absent Lodore, who has stretched out a paternal hand
to my darling child, and who is about to add to his former generous
acts, the dearer one of restoring my Fanny to me? Ask him this
question;--extract this secret from him. Tell him how my chilled heart
warms with pleasure at the prospect of a renewal of our friendship. He
was a god-like boy; daring, generous, and brave. The remembrance of him
has been the bright spot which, except yourself, is all of cheering that
has chequered my gloomy existence. Ask him whether he remembers him
whose life he saved--whom he rescued from oppression and misery. I am an
old man now, weighed down by sorrow and infirmity. Adversity has also
visited him; but he will have withstood the shocks of fate, as gallantly
as a mighty ship stems the waves of ocean: while I, a weather-worn
skiff, am battered and wrecked by the tempest. From all you say, he must
be Lodore. Mark him, Fanny: if you see one lofty in his mien, yet
gracious in all his acts; his person adorned by the noblest attributes
of rank; full of dignity, yet devoid of pride; impatient of all that is
base and insolent, but with a heart open as a woman's to
compassion;--one whose slightest word possesses a charm to attract and
enchain the affections:--if such be your new friend, put this letter
into his hand; he will remember Francis Derham, and love you for my
sake, as well as for your own."




CHAPTER XV


It is our will
That thus enchains us to permitted ill.

SHELLEY.


This was a new inducement to bring back Lodore from the wilds of America,
to the remembrance of former days. The flattering expressions in Derham's
letter soothed his wounded pride, and inspired a desire of associating
once more with men who could appreciate his worth, and sympathize with
his feelings. His spirits became exhilarated; he talked of Europe and
his return thither, with all the animation of sanguine youth. It is one
of the necessary attributes of our nature, always to love what we have
once loved; and though new objects and change in former ones may chill
our affections for a time, we are filled with renewed fervour after
every fresh disappointment, and feel an impatient longing to return to
the cherishing warmth of our early attachments; happy if we do not find
emptiness and desolation, where we left life and hope.

Ethel had never been as happy as at the present time, and her affection
for her father gathered strength from the confidence which existed
between them. He was the passion of her soul, the engrossing attachment
of her loving heart. When she saw a cloud on his brow, she would stand
by him with silent but pleading tenderness, as if to ask whether any
exertion of hers could dissipate his inquietude. She hung upon his
discourse as a heavenly oracle, and welcomed him with gladdened looks of
love, when he returned after any short absence. Her heart was bent upon
pleasing him, she had no thought or pursuit which was not linked with
his participation.

There is perhaps in the list of human sensations, no one so pure, so
perfect, and yet so impassioned, as the affection of a child for its
parent, during that brief interval when they are leaving childhood, and
have not yet felt love. There is something so awful in a father. His
words are laws, and to obey them happiness. Reverence and a desire to
serve, are mingled with gratitude; and duty, without a flaw or question,
so second the instinct of the heart, as to render it imperative.
Afterwards we may love, in spite of the faults of the object of our
attachment; but during the interval alluded to, we have not yet learnt
to tolerate, but also, we have not learned to detect faults. All that a
parent does, appears an emanation from a diviner world; while we fear to
offend, we believe we have no right to be offended; eager to please, we
seek in return approval only, and are too humble to demand a reciprocity
of attention; it is enough that we are permitted to demonstrate our
devotion. Ethel's heart overflowed with love, reverence, worship of her
father. He had stood in the wilds of America a solitary specimen of all
that is graceful, cultivated, and wise among men; she knew of nothing
that might compare to him; and the world without him, was what the earth
might be uninformed by light: he was its sun, its ruling luminary. All
this intensity of feeling existed in her, without her being aware
scarcely of its existence, without her questioning the cause, or
reasoning on the effect. To love her father was the first law of nature,
the chief duty of a child, and she fulfilled it unconsciously, but more
completely than she could have done had she been associated with others,
who might have shared and weakened the concentrated sensibility of her
nature.

At length the packet arrived which brought letters from England. Before
his eyes lay the closed letter pregnant with fate. He was not of a
disposition to recoil from certainty; and yet for a few moments he
hesitated to break the seals--appalled by the magnitude of the crisis
which he believed to be at hand.

Latterly the idea of a reconciliation with Cornelia had been a favourite
in his thoughts. The world was a painful and hard-tasking school. She
must have suffered various disappointments, and endured much disgust,
and so be prepared to lend a willing ear to his overture. She was so
very young when they parted, and since then, had lived entirely under
the influence of Lady Santerre. But what had at one time proved
injurious, might, in course of years, have opened her eyes to the vanity of
the course which she was pursuing. Lodore felt persuaded, that there were
better things to be expected from his wife, than a love of fashion and
an adherence to the prejudices of society. He had failed to bring her
good qualities to light, but time and events might have played the tutor
better, and it merely required perhaps a seasonable interference, a
fortunate circumstance, to prove the truth of his opinion, and to show
Lady Lodore as generous, magnanimous, and devoted, as before she had
appeared proud, selfish, and cold.

How few there are possessed of any sensibility, who mingle with, and are
crushed by the jostling interests of the world, who do not ever and anon
exclaim with the Psalmist, "O for the wings of a dove, that I might flee
away and be at rest!" If such an aspiration was ever breathed by
Cornelia, how gladly, how fondly would her husband welcome the weary
flutterer, open his bosom for her refuge, and study to make her forget
all the disquietudes and follies of headstrong youth!

This was a mere dream. Lodore sighed to think that his position would not
permit him to afford her a shelter from the poisoned arrows of the
world. She must come to him prepared to suffer much. It required not
only the absence of the vulgar worldliness of Lady Santerre, but great
strength of mind to forgive the past, and strong affection to endure the
present. He could only invite her to share the lot of a dishonoured man,
to become a partner in the struggle which he was prepared to enter upon,
to regain his lost reputation. This was no cheering prospect. Pride and
generosity equally forbad his endeavouring to persuade his wife to quit
a course of life she liked, to enter upon a scene of trials and sorrows
with one for whom she did not care.

All these conjectures had long occupied him, but here was certainty--the
letter in his hand. It was sealed with black, and a tremulous shudder
ran through his frame as he tore it open. He soon satisfied
himself--Cornelia lived: he breathed freely again, and proceeded more
calmly to make himself master of the intelligence which the paper he
held contained.

Cornelia lived; but his sister announced a death which he believed would
change the colour of his life. Lady Santerre was no more!

Yes, Cornelia was alive; the bride that had stood beside him at the
altar--whose hand he had held while he pronounced his vows--with whom he
had domesticated for years--the mother of his child still lived. The
cold consuming grave did not wrap her lovely form. The idea of her
death, which the appearance of the black seal conveyed suddenly to his
imagination, had been appalling beyond words. For the last few weeks his
mind had been filled with her image; his thoughts had fed upon the hope
that they should meet once more. Had she died while he was living in
inactive seclusion in the Illinois, he might have been less moved; his
vivid fancy, his passionate heart, could not spare her now, without a
pang of agony. It passed away, and his mind reverted to the actual
situation in which they were placed by the death of his mother-in-law.
Reconciliation had become easy by the removal of that fatal barrier. He
felt assured that he could acquire Cornelia's confidence, win her love,
and administer to her happiness; he determined to leave nothing untried
to bring about so desirable a conclusion to their long and dreary
alienation. The one insuperable obstacle was gone; their daughter, that
loveliest link, that soft silken tie remained: Cornelia must welcome
with maternal delight this better portion of herself.

He glanced over his sister Elizabeth's letter, announcing the death of
Lady Santerre, and then read the one enclosed from Lady Lodore to her
sister-in-law. It was cold, but very decisive. She thanked her first for
the inquiries she had made, and then proceeded to say, that she took
this opportunity, the only one likely to present itself, of expressing
what her own feelings were on this melancholy occasion. "I am afraid,"
she said, "that your brother will look on the death of my dearest mother
as opening the door to our re-union. Some words in your letter seem
indeed to intimate this, or I should have hoped that I was entirely
forgotten. I trust that I am mistaken. My earnest desire is, that my
natural grief, and the tranquillity which I try to secure for myself,
may not be disturbed by fruitless endeavours to bring about what can
never be. My determination may be supposed to arise from pride and
implacable resentment: perhaps it does, but I feel it impossible that we
should ever be any thing but strangers to each other. I will not
complain, and I wish to avoid harsh allusions, but respect for her I
have lost, and a sense of undeserved wrong, are paramount with me. I
shall never intrude upon him. Persuade him that it will be unmanly
cruelty to force himself, even by a letter, on me."

From this violent declaration of an unforgiving heart, Lodore turned to
Elizabeth's letter. This excellent lady, to whom the names of
dissipation and the metropolis were synonymous, and who knew as much of
the world as Parson Adams, assured her brother, that Cornelia, far from
feeling deeply the blow of her mother's death, was pursuing her giddy
course with greater pertinacity than ever. Surrounded by flatterers,
given up to pleasure, she naturally shrunk from being reminded of her
exiled husband and her forgotten child. Her letter showed how ill she
deserved the tenderness and interest which Lodore had expressed. She was
a second Lady Santerre, without being gifted with that maternal
affection, which had in some degree dignified that person's character.

Elizabeth lamented that his wife's hardness of heart might prevent his
proposed visit to England. She did not like to urge it--it might seem
selfish: hitherto she had let herself and her sorrows go for nothing;
could she think of her own gratification, while her brother was
suffering so much calamity? She was growing old--indeed she was old--she
had no kin around her--early friends were dead or lost to her--she had
nothing to live on but the recollection of her brother; she should think
herself blest could she see him once more before she died.

"O my dear brother Henry," continued the kind-hearted lady, "if you
would but say the word--the sea is nothing; people older than I--and I
am not at all infirm--make the voyage. Let me come to America--let me
embrace my niece, and see you once again--let me share your dear home in
the Illinois, which I see every night in my dreams. I should grieve to
be a burthen to you, but it would be my endeavour to prove a comfort and
a help."

Lodore read both of these letters, one after the other, again and again. He
resolved on going to England immediately. Either Cornelia was entirely
callous and worthless, and so to be discarded from his heart for ever,
or after her first bitter feelings on her mother's death were over, she
would soften towards her child, or there was some dread secret feeling
that influenced her, and he must save her from calamity and
wretchedness. One of those changes of feeling to which the character of
Lodore was peculiarly subject, came over him. Lady Santerre was
dead--Cornelia was alone. A thousand dangers surrounded her. It appeared
to him that his first imperious duty was to offer himself to guard and
watch over her. He resolved to leave nothing untried to make her happy.
He would give up Ethel to her--he would gratify every wish she could
frame--pour out benefits lavishly before her--force her to see in him a
benefactor and a friend; and at last, his heart whispered, induce her to
assume again the duties of a wife.




CHAPTER XVI


What is peace? When life is over,
And love ceases to rebel,
Let the last faint sigh discover,
Which precedes the passing knell.

WORDSWORTH.


Lodore was henceforth animated by a new spirit of hope. His projects and
resolves gave him something to live for. He looked forward with
pleasure; feeling, on his expected return to his native country, as the
fabled voyager, who knew that he ought to be contented in the fair
island where chance had thrown him, and yet who hailed with rapture the
approach of the sail that was to bear him back to the miseries of social
life. He reflected that he had in all probability many years before him,
and he was earnest that the decline of his life should, by a display of
prudence and virtuous exertion, cause the errors of his earlier manhood
to be forgotten.

This inspiriting tone of mind was very congenial to Ethel. The prospects
that occupied her father had a definite horizon: all was vague and misty
to her eyes, yet beautiful and alluring. Lodore gave no outline of his
plans: he never named her mother. Uncertain himself, he was unwilling to
excite feelings in Ethel's mind, to be afterwards checked and disappointed.
He painted the future in gay colours, but left it in all the dimness most
favourable for an ardent imagination to exercise itself upon.

In a very few days they were to sail for England. Their passage was
engaged. Lodore had written to his sister to announce his return. He spoke
of Longfield, and of her kind and gentle aunt to Ethel, and she, who, like
Miranda, had known no relative or intimate except her father, warmed
with pleasure to find new ties bind her to her fellow-creatures. She
questioned her father, and he, excited by his own newly-awakened
emotions, dilated eloquently on the joys of his young days, and pleased
Fanny, as well as his own daughter, by a detail of boyish pranks and
adventures which his favourite school-fellow shared. The freedom he
enjoyed in his paternal home, the worship that waited on him there, the
large space which in early youth he appeared to fill in all men's eyes,
the buoyancy and innocence associated with those unshadowed days,
painted them to his memory cloudless and bright. It would be to renew
them to see Longfield again,--to clasp once more the hand of Francis
Derham.

A kind of holiday and festal feeling was diffused through Ethel's mind
by the vivid descriptions and frank communications of her father. She
felt as if about to enter Paradise. America grew dim and sombre in her
eyes; its forests, lakes, and wilds, were empty and silent, while
England swarmed with a thousand lovely forms of pleasure. Her father
strewed a downy velvet path for her, which she trod with light, girlish
steps, happy in the present hour, happier in the anticipated future.

A few days before the party were to sail, Lodore and his daughter dined
with Mrs. Greville. As if they held the reins, and could curb the course
of, fate, each and all were filled with hilarity. Lodore had forgotten
Theodora and her son--had cast from his recollection the long train of
misery, injury, and final ruin, which for so long had occupied his whole
thoughts. He was in his own eyes no longer the branded exile. A strange
distortion of vision blinded this unfortunate man to the truth, which
experience so perpetually teaches us, that the consequences of our
actions _never die_: that repentance and time may paint them to us in
different shapes; but though we shut our eyes, they are still beside us,
helping the inexorable destinies to spin the fatal thread, and
sharpening the implement which is to cut it asunder.

Lodore lived the morning of that day, (it was the first of May, realizing
by its brilliancy and sweets, the favourite months of the poets,) as if
many a morning throughout the changeful seasons was to be his. Some time
he spent on board the vessel in which he was to sail; seeing that all
the arrangements which he had ordered for Ethel and Fanny's comfort were
perfected; then father and daughter rode out together. Often did Ethel
try to remember every word of the conversation held during that ride. It
concerned the fair fields of England, the splendours of Italy, the
refinements and pleasures of Europe. "When we are in London,"--"When we
shall visit Naples,"--such phrases perpetually occurred. It was Lodore's
plan to induce Cornelia to travel with him, and to invite Mr. Derham and
Fanny to be their companions; a warmer climate would benefit his
friend's health. "And for worlds," he said, "I would not lose Derham. It
is the joy of my life to think that by my return to my native country I
secure to myself the society of this excellent and oppressed man."

At six o'clock Lodore and Ethel repaired to Mrs. Greville's house. It had
been intended that no other persons should be invited, but the unexpected
arrival of some friends from Washington, about to sail to England, had
obliged the lady to alter this arrangement. The new guests consisted of
an English gentleman and his wife, and one other, an American, who had
filled a diplomatic situation in London. Annoyed by the sight of
strangers, Lodore kept apart, conversing with Ethel and Fanny.

At dinner he sat opposite to the American. There was something in this
man's physiognomy peculiarly disagreeable to him. He was not a
pleasing-looking man, but that was not all. Lodore fancied that he must
have seen him before under very painful circumstances. He felt inclined to
quarrel with him--he knew not why; and was disturbed and dissatisfied
with himself and every body. The first words which the man spoke were as
an electric shock to him. Twelve long years rolled back--the past became
the present once again. This very American had sat opposite to him at
the memorable dinner at the Russian Ambassador's. At the moment when he
had been hurried away by the fury of his passion against Casimir, he
remembered to have seen a sarcastic sneer on his face, as the republican
marked the arrogance of the English noble. Lodore had been ready then to
turn the fire of his resentment on the insolent observer; but when the
occasion passed away he had entirely forgotten him, till now he rose
like a ghost to remind him of former pains and crimes.

The lapse of years had scarcely altered this person. His hair was
grizzled, but it crowned his head in the same rough abundance as
formerly. His face, which looked as if carved out of wood, strongly and
deeply lined, showed no tokens of a more advanced age. He was then
elderly-looking for a middle-aged man; he was now young-looking for an
elderly man. Nature had disdained to change an aspect which showed so
little of her divinity, and which no wrinkles nor withering could mar.
Lodore, turning from this apparition, caught the reflection of himself in
an opposite mirror. Association of ideas had made him unconsciously expect
to behold the jealous husband of Cornelia. How changed, how passion-worn
and tarnished was the countenance that met his eyes. He recovered his
self-possession as he became persuaded that this chance visitant, who
had seen him but once, would be totally unable to recognize him.

This unwelcome guest had been attached to the American embassy in
England, and had but lately returned to New York. He was full of dislike
of the English. Contempt for them, and pride in his countrymen, being
the cherished feelings of his mind; the latter he held up to admiration
from prejudiced views; a natural propensity to envy and depreciation led
him to detract from the former. He was, in short, a most disagreeable
person; and his insulting observations on his country moved Lodore's
spleen, while his mind was shaken from its balance by the sight of one who
reminded him of his past errors and ruin. He was fast advancing to a
state of irritability, when he should lose all command over himself. He
felt this, and tried to subdue the impetuous rush of bitterness which
agitated him; he remembered that he must expect many trials like this,
and that, rightly considered, this was a good school wherein he might
tutor himself to self-possession and firmness. He went to another
extreme, and addressing himself to, and arguing with, the object of his
dislike, endeavoured to gloss over to himself the rising violence of his
impassioned temper.

The ladies retired, and the gentlemen entered upon a political
discussion on some event passing in Europe. The English guest took his
departure early, and Lodore and the other continued to converse. Some
mention was made of newspapers newly arrived, and the American proposed
that they should repair to the coffee-house to see them. Lodore agreed: he
thought that this would be a good opportunity to shake off his
distasteful companion.

The coffee-room contained nearly twenty persons. They were in loud
discussion upon a question of European politics, and reviling England and
her manners in the most contemptuous terms. This was not balm for Lodore's
sore feelings. His heart swelled indignantly at the sarcasms which these
strangers levelled against his native country; he felt as if he was
acting a coward's part while he listened tamely. His companion soon
entered with vehemence into the conversation; and the noble, who was
longing to quarrel with him, now drew himself up with forced composure,
fixing his full meaning eyes upon the speaker, hoping by his quiescence
to entice him into expressions which he would insist on being retracted.
His temper by this time entirely mastered him. In a calmer moment he
would have despised himself for being influenced by such a man, to any
sentiment except contempt; but the tempest was abroad, and all sobriety
of feeling was swept away like chaff before the wind.

Mr. Hatfield,--such was the American's name,--perceiving that he was
listened to, entered with great delight on his favourite topic, a
furious and insolent philippic against England, in mass and in detail.
Lodore still listened; there was a dry sneer in the tones of the speaker's
voice, that thrilled him with hate and rage. At length, by some chance
reverting to the successful struggle America had made for her
independence, and ridiculing the resistance of the English on the
occasion, Hatfield named Lodore.

"Lodore!" cried one of the by-standers; "Fitzhenry was the name of the man
who took the Oronooko."

"Aye, Fitzhenry it was," said Hatfield, "Lodore is his nickname. King
George's bit of gilt gingerbread, which mightily pleased the sapient
mariner. An Englishman thinks himself honoured when he changes one name for
another. Admiral Fitzhenry was the scum of the earth--Lord Lodore a pillar
of state. Pity that infamy should so soon have blackened the glorious
title!"

Lodore's pale cheek suddenly flushed at these words, and then blanched
again, as with compressed lips he resolved to hear yet more, till the
insult should no longer be equivocal. The word "infamy" was echoed from
various lips. Hatfield found that he had insured a hearing, and, glad of an
audience, he went on to relate his story--it was of the dinner at the
Russian Ambassador's--of the intemperate violence of Lodore--and the
youthful Lyzinski's wrongs. "I saw the blow given," continued the
narrator, "and I would have caned the fellow on the spot, had I not
thought that a bullet would do his business better. But when it came to
that, London was regaled by an event which could not have happened here,
for we have no such cowards among us. My lord was not to be found--he
had absconded--sneaked off like a mean-spirited, pitiful scoundrel!"

The words were still on the man's lips when a blow, sudden and
unexpected, extended him on the floor. After this swiftly-executed act
of retaliation, Lodore folded his arms, and as his antagonist rose, foaming
with rage, said, "You, at least, shall have no cause to complain of not
receiving satisfaction for your injuries at my hands. I am ready to give
it, even in this room. I am Lord Lodore!"

Duels, that sad relic of feudal barbarism, were more frequent then than
now in America; at all times they are more fatal and more openly carried
on there than in this country. The nature of the quarrel in the present
instance admitted of no delay; and it was resolved, that the antagonists
should immediately repair to an open place near the city, to terminate,
by the death of one, the insults they had mutually inflicted.

Lodore saw himself surrounded by Americans, all strangers to him; nor was
he acquainted with one person in New York whom he could ask to be his
second. This was matter of slight import: the idea of vindicating his
reputation, and of avenging the bitter mortifications received from
society, filled him with unnatural gladness; and he was hastening to the
meeting, totally regardless of any arrangement for his security.

There was a gentleman, seated at a distant part of the coffee-room, who
had been occupied by reading; nor seemed at all to give ear to what was
going on, till the name of Lodore occurred: he then rose, and when the blow
was given, drew nearer the group; though he still stood aloof, while, with
raised and angry voices, they assailed Lodore, and he, replying in his
deep, subdued voice, agreed to the meeting which they tumultuously
demanded. Now, as they were hastening away, and Lodore was following
them, confessedly unbefriended, this gentleman approached, and putting
his card into the nobleman's hand, said, "I am an Englishman, and should
be very glad if you would accept my services on this painful occasion."

Lodore looked at the card, on which was simply engraved the name of "Mr.
Edward Villiers," and then at him who addressed him. He was a young
man--certainly not more than three-and-twenty. An air of London fashion,
to which Lodore had been so long unused, was combined with a most
prepossessing countenance. He was light-haired and blue-eyed;
ingenuousness and sincerity marked his physiognomy. The few words he had
spoken were enforced by a graceful cordiality of manner, and a
silver-toned voice, that won the heart. Lodore was struck by his
prepossessing exterior, and replied with warm thanks; adding, that his
services would be most acceptable on certain conditions,--which were
merely that he should put no obstacle to the immediate termination of
the quarrel, in any mode, however desperate, which his adversary might
propose. "Otherwise," Lodore added, "I must entirely decline your
interference. All this is to me matter of far higher import than mere
life and death, and I can submit to no controul."

"Then my services must be limited to securing fair play for you," said
Mr. Villiers.

During this brief parley, they were in the street, proceeding towards
the place of meeting. Day had declined, and the crescent moon was high
in the heavens: each instant its beams grew more refulgent, as twilight
yielded to night.

"We shall have no difficulty in seeing each other," said Lodore, in a
cheerful voice. He felt cheerful: a burthen was lifted from his heart. How
much must a brave man suffer under the accusation of cowardice, and how
joyous when an opportunity is granted of proving his courage! Lodore was
brave to rashness: at this crisis he felt as if about to be born again
to all the earthly blessings of which he had been deprived so long. He
did not think of the dread baptism of blood which was to occasion his
regeneration--still less of personal danger; he thought only of good
name restored--of his reputation for courage vindicated--of the
insolence of this ill-spoken fellow signally chastised.

"Have you weapons?" asked his companion.

"They will procure pistols, I suppose," replied Lodore: "we should lose
much time by going to the hotel for mine."

"We are passing that where I am," said Mr. Villiers. "If you will wait
one moment I will fetch mine;--or will you go up with me?"

They entered the house, and the apartments of Mr. Villiers. At such
moments slight causes operate changes on the human heart; and as various
impulses sweep like winds over its chords, that subtle instrument gives
forth various tones. A moment ago, Lodore seemed to raise his proud head to
the stars: he felt as if escaping from a dim, intricate cavern, into the
blessed light of day. The strong excitement permitted no second
thought--no second image. With a lighter step than Mr. Villiers, he
followed that gentleman up-stairs. For a moment, as he went into an
inner apartment for the pistols, Lodore was alone: a desk was open on
the table; and paper, unwritten on, upon the desk. Scarcely knowing what
he did, Lodore took the pen, and wrote--"Ethel, my child! my life's
dearest blessing! be virtuous, be useful, be happy!--farewell, for
ever!"--and under this he wrote Mrs. Greville's address. The first words
were written with a firm hand; but the recollection of all that might
occur, made his fingers tremble as he continued, and the direction was
nearly illegible. "If any thing happens to me," said he to Mr. Villiers,
"you will add to your kindness immeasurably by going there,"--pointing
to the address,--"and taking precaution that my daughter may hear of her
disaster in as tender a manner as possible."

"Is there any thing else?" asked his companion. "Command me freely, I
beseech you; I will obey your injunctions to the letter."

"It is too late now," replied the noble; "and we must not keep these
gentlemen waiting. The little I have to say we will talk of as we walk."

"I feel," continued Lodore, after they were again in the street, "that if
this meeting end fatally, I have no power to enforce my wishes and designs
beyond the grave. The providence which has so strangely conducted the
drama of my life, will proceed in its own way after the final
catastrophe. I commit my daughter to a higher power than mine, secure
that so much innocence and goodness must receive blessings, even in this
ill-grained state of existence. You will see Mrs. Greville: she is a
kind-hearted, humane woman, and will exert herself to console my child.
Ethel--Miss Fitzhenry, I mean--must, as soon as is practicable, return
to England. She will be received there by my sister, and remain with her
till--till her fate be otherwise decided. We were on the point of
sailing;--I have fitted up a cabin for her;--she might make the voyage
in that very vessel. You, perhaps, will consult--though what claim have
I on you?"

"A claim most paramount," interrupted Villiers eagerly,--"that of a
countryman in a foreign land--of a gentleman vindicating his honour at
the probable expense of life."

"Thank you!" replied Lodore;--"my heart thanks you--for my own sake, and
for my daughter's--if indeed you will kindly render her such services as
her sudden loss may make sadly necessary."

"Depend upon me;--though God grant she need them not!"

"For her sake, I say Amen!" said Lodore; "for my own--life is a worn-out
garment--few tears will be shed upon my grave, except by Ethel."

"There is yet another," said Villiers with visible hesitation: "pardon
me, if I appear impertinent; but at such a moment, may I not name Lady
Lodore?"

"For her, indeed," answered the peer, "the event of this evening, if
fatal to me, will prove fortunate: she will be delivered from a heavy
chain. May she be happy in another choice! Are you acquainted with her?"

"I am, slightly--that is, not very intimately."

"If you meet her on your return to England," continued the noble;--"if
you ever see Lady Lodore, tell her that I invoked a blessing on her with my
latest breath--that I forgive her, and ask her forgiveness. But we are
arrived. Remember Ethel."

"Yet one moment," cried Villiers;--"one moment of reflection, of calm!
Is there no way of preventing this encounter?"

"None!--fail me not, I intreat you, in this one thing;--interpose no
obstacle--be as eager and as firm as I myself am. Our friends have
chosen a rising ground: we shall be excellent marks for one another.
Pray do not lose time."

The American and his second stood in dark relief against the moon-lit
sky. As the rays fell upon the English noble, Hatfield observed to his
companion, that he now perfectly recognized him, and wondered at his
previous blindness. Perhaps he felt some compunction for the insult he
had offered; but he said nothing, and no attempt was made on either side
at amicable explanation. They proceeded at once, with a kind of savage
indifference, to execute the murderous designs which caused them to
disturb the still and lovely night.

It was indeed a night, that love, and hope, and all the softer emotions
of the soul, would have felt congenial to them. A balmy, western breeze
lifted the hair lightly from Lodore's brow, and played upon his cheek; the
trees were bathed in yellow moonshine; a glowworm stealing along the
grass scarce showed its light; and sweet odours were wafted from grove
and field. Lodore stood, with folded arms, gazing upon the scene in
silence, while the seconds were arranging preliminaries, and loading the
firearms. None can tell what thoughts then passed through his mind. Did
he rejoice in his honour redeemed, or grieve for the human being at
whose breast he was about to aim?--or were his last thoughts spent upon
the account he might so speedily be called on to render before his
Creator's throne? When at last he took his weapon from the hand of
Villiers, his countenance was serene, though solemn; and his voice firm
and calm. "Remember me to Ethel," he said; "and tell her to thank
you;--I cannot sufficiently; yet I do so from my heart. If I live--then
more of this."

The antagonists were placed: they were both perfectly
self-possessed--bent, with hardness and cruelty of purpose, on
fulfilling the tragic act. As they stood face to face--a few brief paces
only intervening--on the moon-lit hill--neither had ever been more
alive, more full of conscious power, of moral and physical energy, than
at that moment. Villiers saw them standing beneath the silver moonbeams,
each in the pride of life, of strength, of resolution. A ray glanced from
the barrel of Lodore's pistol, as he raised and held it out with a steady
hand--a flash--the reports--and then he staggered two steps, fell, and
lay on the earth, making no sign of life. Villiers rushed to him: the
wound was unapparent--no blood flowed, but the bullet had entered his
heart. His friend raised his head in his arms; his eyes opened; his lips
moved, but no sound issued from them;--a shadow crossed his face--the
body slipped from Villiers's support to the ground--all was over--Lodore
was dead!




CHAPTER XVII

En cor gentil, amor per mort no passa.

AUSIAS MARCH, TROUBADOUR.


We return to Longfield and to Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry. The glory of
summer invested the world with light, cheerfulness, and beauty, when the
sorrowing sister of Lodore visited London, to receive her orphan niece from
the hands of the friend of Mrs. Greville, under whose protection she had
made the voyage. The good lady folded poor Ethel in her arms, overcome
by the likeness she saw to her beloved brother Henry, in his youthful
days, before passion had worn and misfortune saddened him. Her soft,
brown, lamp-like eyes, beamed with the same sensibility. Yet when she
examined her more closely, Mrs Elizabeth lost somewhat of the likeness;
for the lower part of her face resembled her mother: her hair was
lighter and her complexion much fairer than Lodore; besides that the
expression of her countenance was peculiar to herself, and possessed
that individuality which is so sweet to behold, but impossible to
describe.

They lingered but a few days in London. Fanny Derham, who accompanied
her on her voyage, had already returned to her father, and there was
nothing to detain them from Longfield. Ethel had no adieus to make that
touched her heart. Her aunt was more to her than any other living being,
and her strongest desire now was, to visit the scenes once hallowed by
her father's presence. The future was a chaos of dark regret and
loneliness; her whole life, she thought, would be composed of one long
memory.

One memory, and one fatal image. Ethel had not only consecrated her
heart to her father, but his society was a habit with her, and, until
now, she had never even thought how she could endure existence without
the supporting influence of his affection. His conversation, so full of
a kind penetration into her thoughts, was calculated to develop and
adorn them; his manly sense and paternal solicitude, had all fostered a
filial love, the most tender and strong. Add to this, his sudden and
awful death. Already had they schemed their future life in a world new
to Ethel: he had excited her enthusiasm by descriptions of the wonders
of art in the old countries, and raised her curiosity while promising to
satisfy it; and she had eagerly looked forward to the time when she
should see the magical works of man, and mingle with a system of
society, of which, except by books, he alone presented any ensample to
her. Their voyage was fixed, and on the other side of their watery way
she had figured a very Elysium of wonders and pleasures. The late change
in their mode of life had served to endear him doubly to her. It had
been the occupation of her life to think of her father, to communicate
all her thoughts to him, and in the unreflecting confidence of youth,
she had looked forward to no termination of a state of existence, that
had began from her cradle. He propped her entire world; the foundations
must moulder and crumble away without him--and he was gone--where then
was she?

Mr. Villiers had, as soon as he was able, hurried to Mrs. Greville's
house. By some strange chance, the fatal tidings had preceded him, and he
found the daughter of the unfortunate Lodore bewildered and maddened by her
frightful calamity. Her first desire was to see all that was left of her
parent--she could not believe that he was indeed dead--she was certain
that care and skill might revive him--she insisted on being led to his
side; her friends strove to restrain her, but she rushed into the
street, she knew not whither, to ask for, to find her father. The
timidity of her temper was overborne by the wild expectation of yet
being able to recall him from among the dead. Villiers followed her,
and, yielding to her wishes, guided her towards the hotel whither the
remains of Lodore had been carried. He judged that the exertion of
walking thither, and the time that must elapse before she arrived, would
calm and subdue her. He talked to her of her father as they went
along--he endeavoured to awaken the source of tears--but she was
silent--absorbed--brooding darkly on her hopes. Pity for herself had not
yet arisen, nor the frightful certainty of bereavement. To see those
dear lineaments--to touch his hand--the very hand that had so often
caressed her, clay-cold and incapable of motion! Could it be!

She did not answer Villiers, she only hurried forward; she feared
obstruction to her wishes; her soul was set on one thought only. Had
Villiers endeavoured to deceive her, it would have been in vain. Arrived
at the hotel, as by instinct, she sprung up the stairs, and reached the
door of the room. It was darkened, in useless but decent respect for the
death within; there lay a figure covered by a sheet, and already
chilling the atmosphere around it. The imagination is slow to act upon
the feelings in comparison with the quick operation of the senses. Ethel
now knew that her father was dead. Mortal strength could support no
more--the energy of hope deserting her, she sunk lifeless on the ground.

For a long time she was passive in the hands of others. A violent
illness confined her to her bed, and physical suffering subdued the
excess of mental agony. Villiers left her among kind friends. It was
resolved that she and Fanny Derham should proceed to England, under the
protection of the friends of Mrs. Greville about to return thither; he
was himself obliged to return to England without delay.

Ethel's destiny was as yet quite uncertain. It was decided by the
opening of her father's will. This had been made twelve years before on
his first arrival at New York, and breathed the spirit of resentment, and
even revenge, against his wife. Lodore had indeed not much wealth to leave.
His income chiefly consisted in a grant from the crown, entailed on
heirs male, which in default of these, reverted back, and in a sinecure
which expired with him. His paternal estate at Longfield, and a sum
under twenty thousand pounds, the savings of twelve years, formed all
his possessions. The income arising from the former was absorbed by Lady
Lodore's jointure of a thousand a year, and five hundred a year settled
on his sister, together with permission to occupy the family mansion
during her life. The remaining sum was disposed of in a way most
singular. Without referring to the amount of what he could leave, he
bequeathed the additional sum of six hundred a year to Lady Lodore, on
the express condition, that she should not interfere with, nor even see,
her child; upon her failing in this condition, this sum was to be left
to accumulate till Ethel was of age. Ethel was ultimately to inherit
every thing; but while her mother and aunt lived, her fortune consisted
of little more than five thousand pounds; and even in this, she was
limited to the use of the interest only until she was of age; a previous
marriage would have no influence on the disposition of her property.
Mrs. Elizabeth was left her guardian.

This will was in absolute contradiction to the wishes and feelings in
which Lord Lodore died; so true had his prognostic been, that he had no
power beyond the grave. He had probably forgotten the existence of this
will, or imagined that it had been destroyed: he had determined to make a
new one on his arrival in England. Meanwhile it was safely deposited with
his solicitor in London, and Mrs. Elizabeth, with mistaken zeal,
hastened to put it into force, and showed herself eager to obey her
brother's wishes with scrupulous exactitude. The contents of it were
communicated to Lady Lodore. She made no comment--returned no answer.
She was suddenly reduced from comparative affluence (for her husband's
allowance had consisted of several thousands) to a bare sixteen hundred
a year. Whether she would be willing to diminish this her scanty income
one third, and take on herself, besides, the care of her daughter, was
not known. She remained inactive and silent, and Ethel was placed at
once under the guardianship of her aunt.

These two ladies left London in the old lumbering chariot which had
belonged to the Admiral. Now, indeed, Ethel found herself in a new
country, with new friends around her, speaking a new language, and each
change of scene made more manifest the complete revolution of her
fortunes. She looked on all with languid eyes, and a heart dead to every
pleasure. Her aunt, who bore a slight resemblance of her father, won
some degree of interest; and the sole consolation offered her, was to
trace a similarity of voice and feature, and thus to bring the lost Lodore
more vividly before her. The journey to Longfield was therefore not wholly
without a melancholy charm. Mrs. Elizabeth longed to obtain more minute
information concerning her brother, her pride and her delight, than had
been contained in his short and infrequent letters. She hazarded a few
questions. Grief loves to feed upon itself, and to surround itself with
multiplications of its own image; like a bee, it will find sweets in the
poison flower, and nestle within its own creations, although they pierce
the heart that cherishes them. Ethel felt a fascination in dwelling for
ever on the past. She asked for nothing better than to live her life
over again, while narrating its simple details, and to bring her father
back from his grave to dwell with her, by discoursing perpetually
concerning him. She was unwearied in her descriptions, her anecdotes,
her praises. The Illinois rose before the eyes of her aunt, like a
taintless paradise, inhabited by an angel. Love and good dwelt together
there in blameless union; the sky was brighter; the earth fairer,
fresher, younger, more magnificent, and more wonderful, than in the old
world. The good lady called to mind, with surprise, the melancholy and
despairing letters she had received from her brother, while inhabiting
this Eden. It was matter of mortification to his mourning daughter to
hear, as from himself, as it were, that any sorrows had visited his
heart while with her. When we love one to whom we have devoted our lives
with undivided affection, the idea that the beloved object suffered any
grief while with us, jars with our sacred sorrow. We delight to make the
difference between the possession of their society, and our subsequent
bereavement, entire in its contrasted happiness and misery; we wish to
have engrossed their whole souls, as they do ours, at the period of
regret, and it is like the most cruel theft, to know that we have been
deprived of any of the power we believed that we possessed, to influence
their entire being. But then again, forgetting her aunt's interruptions.
Ethel returned to the story of their occupations, their amusements,
their fond and unsullied intercourse, her eyes streamed with tears as
she spoke, while yet her heart felt relief in the indulgence of her woe.

When the ladies returned to Longfield, it became Mrs. Elizabeth's turn
to narrate. She had lived many years feeding silently on the memory of
by-gone time. During her brother's exile, she had seldom spoken his
name, for she felt little inclined to satisfy the inquisitiveness of the
good people of Longfield. But now her long-stored anecdotes, her sacred
relics, the spots made dear by his presence, all were a treasure poured
out bounteously before Ethel. Nothing appeared so natural to the
unfortunate girl as that another should, like herself, worship the
recollection of her adored father. To love him while he lived, to see
nothing in the world that had lost him, except his shadow cast upon its
benighted state, appeared the only existence that could follow his
extinction. Some people, when they die, leave but a foot of ground
vacant, which the eager pressing ranks of their fellow-creatures fill up
immediately, walking on their grave, as on common earth; others leave a
gap, a chasm, a fathomless gulf, beside which the survivor sits for ever
hopeless. Both Ethel and her aunt, in their several ways, in youth and
age, were similarly situated. Both were cut off from the great family of
their species; wedded to one single being, and he was gone. Both made
the dead Lodore the focus to concentrate, and the mirror to reflect, all
their sensations and experience. He visited their dreams by night, his name
was their study, their pastime, their sole untiring society.

Mrs. Elizabeth, the gentlest visionary that had ever outlived hope,
without arriving at its fruition, having reached those years when memory
is the natural food of the human mind, found this fare exceedingly well
adapted to her constitution. She had pined a little while cut off from
all heart-felt communication with her fellow-creatures, but the presence
of Ethel fulfilled her soul's desire; she found sympathy, and an
auditress, into whose ever-attentive ear she could pour those reveries
which she had so long nourished in secret. Whoso had heard the good lady
talk of endless tears and mourning for the loss of Lodore, of life not
worth having when he was gone, of the sad desolation of their position, and
looked at her face, beaming with satisfaction, with only so much
sensibility painted there as to render it expressive of all that is kind
and compassionate, good-humour in her frequent smile, and sleek content
in her plump person, might have laughed at the contrast; and yet have
pondered on the strange riddle we human beings present, and how
contradictions accord in our singular machinery. This good aunt was
incapable of affectation, and all was true and real that she said. She
lived upon the idea of her brother; he was all in all to her, but they
had been divided so long, that his death scarcely increased the
separation; and she could talk of meeting him in heaven, with as firm
and cheerful a faith, as a few months before she had anticipated his
return to England. Though sincere in her regret for his death, habit had
turned lamentation into a healthy nutriment, so that she throve upon the
tears she shed, and grew fat and cheerful upon her sighs. She would lead
the agonized girl to the vault which contained the remains of her
brother, and hover near it, as a Catholic beside the shrine of a
favourite saint--the visible image giving substance and form to her
reverie; for hitherto, her dreamy life had wanted the touch of reality,
which the presence of her niece, and the sad memorial of her lost
brother, afforded.

The home-felt sensations of the mourning orphan, were in entire contrast
to this holiday woe. While her aunt brooded over her sorrow "to keep it
warm," it wrapped Ethel's soul as with a fiery torture. Every cheerful
thought lay buried with her father, and the tears she shed near his
grave were accompanied by a wrenching of her being, and a consequent
exhaustion, that destroyed the elasticity of the spirit of youth. The
memory of Lodore, which soothed his sister, haunted his child like a sad
beckoning, yet fatal vision; she yearned to reach the shore where his
pale ghost perpetually wandered--the earth seemed a dark prison, and
liberty and light dwelt with the dead beyond the grave. Eternally
conversant with the image of death, she was brought into too near
communion with the grim enemy of life. She wasted and grew pale: nor did
any voice speak to her of the unreasonableness of her grief; her father
was not near to teach her fortitude, and there appeared a virtue and a
filial piety in the excess of her regret, which blinded her aunt to the
fatal consequences of its indulgence.

While summer lasted, and the late autumn protracted its serenity almost
into winter, Ethel wandered in the lanes and fields; and in spite of
wasting grief, the free air of heaven, which swept her cheek, preserved
its healthy hue and braced her limbs. But when dreary inclement winter
arrived, and the dull fireside of aunt Bessy became the order of the
day, without occupation to amuse, or society to distract her thoughts,
given up to grief, and growing into a monument of woe, it became evident
that the springs of life were becoming poisoned, and that health and
existence itself were giving way before the destructive influences at
work within. Appetite first, then sleep, deserted her. A slight cold
became a cough, and then changed into a preying fever. She grew so thin
that her large eyes, shining with unnatural lustre, appeared to occupy
too much of her face, and her brow was streaked with ghastly hues. Poor
Mrs. Elizabeth, when she found that neither arrow-root nor chicken-broth
restored her, grew frightened--the village practitioner exhausted his
skill without avail. Ethel herself firmly believed that she was going to
die, and fondly cherished the hope of rejoining her father. She was in
love with death, which alone could reunite her to the being, apart from
whom she believed it impossible to exist.

But limits were now placed to Mrs. Elizabeth's romance. The danger of
Ethel was a frightful reality that awoke every natural feeling. Ethel,
the representative of her brother, the last of their nearly extinct
race, the sole relation she possessed, the only creature whom she could
entirely love, was dear to her beyond expression; and the dread of
losing her gave activity to her slothful resolves. Having seldom, during
the whole course of her life, been called upon to put any plan or wish
of her's into actual execution, what another would have immediately and
easily done, was an event to call forth all her energies, and to require
all her courage; luckily she possessed sufficient to meet the present
exigency. She wrote up to London to her single correspondent there, her
brother's solicitor. A house was taken, and the first warm days of
spring found the ladies established in the metropolis. A physician had
been called in, and he pronounced the mind only to be sick. "Amuse her,"
he said, "occupy her--prevent her from dwelling on those thoughts which
have preyed upon her health; let her see new faces, new places, every
thing new--and youth, and a good constitution, will do the rest."

There seemed so much truth in this advice, that all dangerous symptoms
disappeared from the moment of Ethel's leaving Essex. Her strength
returned--her face resumed its former loveliness; and aunt Bessy,
overjoyed at the change, occupied herself earnestly in discovering
amusements for her niece in the numerous, wide-spread, and very busy
congregation of human beings, which forms the western portion of London.




CHAPTER XVIII


You are now
In London, that great sea, whose ebb and flow,
At once is deaf and loud.

SHELLEY.


There is no uninhabited desart so dreary as the peopled streets of
London, to those who have no ties with its inhabitants, nor any pursuits
in common with its busy crowds. A drop of water in the ocean is no
symbol of the situation of an isolated individual thrown upon the stream
of metropolitan life; that amalgamates with its kindred element; but the
solitary being finds no pole of attraction to cause a union with its
fellows, and bastilled by the laws of society, it is condemned to
incommunicative solitude.

Ethel was thrown completely upon her aunt, and her aunt was a cypher in
the world. She had not a single acquaintance in London, and was wholly
inexperienced in its ways. She dragged Ethel about to see sights, and
Ethel was amused for a time. The playhouses were a great source of
entertainment to her, and all kinds of exhibitions, panoramas, and
shows, served to fill up her day. Still the great want of all shed an
air of dulness over every thing--the absence of human intercourse, and
of the conversation and sympathy of her species. Ethel, as she drove
through the mazy streets, and mingled with the equipages in the park,
could not help thinking what pleasant people might be found among the
many she saw, and how strange it was that her aunt did not speak even to
one among them. This solitude, joined to a sense of exclusion, became
very painful. Again and again she sighed for the Illinois; that was
inhabited by human beings, humble and uncultivated as they might be. She
knew their wants, and could interest herself in their goings on. All the
moving crowd of men and women now around her seemed so many automata:
she started when she heard them address each other, and express any
feeling or intention that distinguished them from the shadows of a
phantasmagoria.

Where were the boasted delights of European intercourse which Lodore had
vaunted?--the elegancies, and the wit, or the improvement to be derived
from its society?--the men and women of talent, of refinement, and
taste, who by their conversation awaken the soul to new powers, and
exhilarate the spirits with a purer madness than wine--who with
alternate gaiety and wisdom, humour and sagacity, amuse while they
teach; accompanying their lessons with that spirit of sympathy, that
speaking to the eye and ear, as well as to the mind, which books can so
poorly imitate? "Here, doubtless, I should find all these," thought
Ethel, as she surveyed the audience at the theatres, or the daily
congregations she met in her drives; "yet I live here as if not only I
inhabited a land whose language was unknown to me, for then I might
converse by signs,--but as if I had fallen among beings of another
species, with whom I have no affinity: I should almost say that I walked
among them invisible, did they not condescend sometimes to gaze at me,
proving that at least I am seen."

Time sped on very quickly, meanwhile, in spite of these repinings; for
her days were past in the utmost monotony,--so that though the hours a
little lagged, yet she wondered where they were when they were gone: and
they had spent more than a month in town, though it seemed but a few
days. Ethel had entirely recovered her health, and more than her former
beauty. She was nearly seventeen: she was rather tall and slim; but
there was a bending elegance in her form, joined to an elastic step,
which was singularly graceful. No man could see her without a wish to
draw near to afford protection and support; and the soft expression of
her full eyes added to the charm. Her deep mourning dress, the
simplicity of her appearance, her face so prettily shaded by her bright
ringlets, often caused her to be remarked, and people asked one another
who she was. None knew; and the old-fashioned appearance of Mrs.
Elizabeth Fitzhenry, and the want of style which characterized all her
arrangements, prevented our very aristocratic gentry from paying as much
attention to her as they otherwise would.

One day, this gentle, solitary pair attended a morning concert. Ethel
had not been to the Opera, and now heard Pasta for the first time. Her
father had cultivated her taste for Italian music; for without
cultivation--without in some degree understanding and being familiar
with an art, it is rare that we admire even the most perfect specimens
of it. Ethel listened with wrapt attention; her heart beat quick, and
her eyes became suffused with tears which she could not suppress;--so
she leant forward, shading her face as much as she could with her veil,
and trying to forget the throng of strangers about her. They were in the
pit; and having come in late, sat at the end of one of the forms.
Pasta's air was concluded; and she still turned aside, being too much
agitated to wish to speak, when she heard her aunt addressing some one
as an old acquaintance. She called her friend "Captain Markham,"
expressed infinite pleasure at seeing him, and whispered her niece that
here was an old friend of her father's. Ethel turned and beheld Mr.
Villiers. His face lighted up with pleasure, and he expressed his joy at
the chance which had produced the meeting; but the poor girl was unable
to reply. All colour deserted her cheeks; marble pale and cold, her
voice failed, and her heart seemed to die within her. The room where
last she saw the lifeless remains of her father rose before her; and the
appearance of Mr. Villiers was as a vision from another world, speaking
of the dead. Mrs. Elizabeth, considerably surprised, asked her how she
came to know Captain Markham. Ethel would have said, "Let us go!" but
her voice died away, and she felt that tears would follow any attempt at
explanation. Ashamed of the very possibility of occasioning a scene, and
yet too disturbed to know well what she was about, she suddenly rose,
and though the commencement of a new air was commanding silence and
attention; she hastily quitted the room, and found herself alone,
outside the door, before her aunt was well aware that she was gone. She
claimed Captain Markham's assistance to follow the fugitive; and,
attended by him, at length discovered her chariot, to which Ethel had
been led by the servant, and in which she was sitting, weeping bitterly.
Mrs. Elizabeth felt inclined to ask her whether she was mad; but she
also was struck dumb; for her Captain Markham had said--"I am very sorry
to have distressed Miss Fitzhenry. My name is Villiers. I cannot wonder
at her agitation; but it would give me much pleasure if she would permit
me to call on her, when she can see me with more composure."

With these words, he assisted the good lady into the carriage, bowed,
and disappeared. He was not Captain Markham! How could she have been so
stupid as to imagine that he was? He looked, upon the whole, rather
younger than Captain Markham had done, when she formed acquaintance with
him, during her expedition to London on the occasion of Ethel's
christening. He was taller, too, and not quite so stout; yet he was so
like--the same frank, open countenance, the same ingenuous manner, and
the same clear blue eyes. Certainly Captain Markham was not so
handsome;--and what a fool Mr. Villiers must think her, for having
mistaken him for a person who resembled him sixteen years ago; quite
forgetting that Mr. Villiers was ignorant who her former friend was, and
when she had seen him. All these perplexing thoughts passed through Mrs.
Fitzhenry's brain, tinging her aged cheek with a blush of shame; while
Ethel, having recovered herself, was shocked to remember how foolishly
and rudely she had behaved; and longed to apologize, yet knew not how;
and fancied that it was very unlikely that she should ever see Mr.
Villiers again. Her aunt, engaged by her own distress, quite forgot the
intention he had expressed of calling, and could only exclaim and lament
over her folly. The rest of the day was spent with great discomfort to
both; for the sight of Mr. Villiers renewed all Ethel's sorrows; and
again and again she bestowed the tribute of showers of tears to her dear
father's memory.

The following day, much to Ethel's delight, and the annoyance of Mrs.
Elizabeth, who could not get over her sense of shame, Mr. Villiers
presented himself in their drawing-room. Villiers, however, was a man
speedily to overcome even any prejudice formed against him; far more
easily, therefore, could he obviate the good aunt's confusion, and put
her at her ease. His was one of those sunny countenances that spoke a
heart ready to give itself away in kindness;--a cheering voice, whose
tones echoed the frankness and cordiality of his nature. Blest with a
buoyant, and even careless spirit, as far as regarded himself, he had a
softness, a delicacy, and a gentleness, with respect to others, which
animated his manners with irresistible fascination. His heart was open
to pity--his soul the noblest and clearest ever fashioned by nature in
her happiest mood. He had been educated in the world--he lived for the
world, for he had not genius to raise himself above the habits and
pursuits of his countrymen: yet he took only the better part of their
practices; and shed a grace over them, so alien to their essence, that
any one might have been deceived, and have fancied that he proceeded on
a system and principles of his own.

He had travelled a good deal, and was somewhat inclined, when pleased
with his company, to narrate his adventures and experiences. Ethel was
naturally rather taciturn; and Mrs. Elizabeth was too much absorbed in
the pleasure of listening, to interrupt their visitor. He felt himself
peculiarly happy and satisfied between the two, and his visit was
excessively long; nor did he go away before he had appointed to call the
next day, and opened a long vista of future visits for himself, assisted
by the catalogue of all that the ladies had not seen, and all that they
desired to see, in London.

Villiers had been animated while with them, but he left the house full
of thought. The name of Fitzhenry, or rather that of Lodore, was familiar
to him; and the strange chance that had caused him to act as second to the
lamented noble who bore this title, and which brought him in contact
with his orphan and solitary daughter, appeared to him like the
enchantment of fairy land. From the presence of Ethel, he proceeded to
Lady Lodore's house, which was still shut up; yet he knocked, and
inquired of the servant whether she had returned to England. She was
still at Baden, he was told, and not expected for a month or two; and
this answer involved him in deeper thought than before.




END OF VOL. I.


CHAPTER I

Excellent creature! whose perfections make
Even sorrow lovely!

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


Mr. Villiers now became the constant visitor of Mrs. Elizabeth and her
niece; and all discontent, all sadness, all listlessness, vanished in
his presence. There was in his mind a constant spring of vivacity, which
did not display itself in mere gaiety, but in being perfectly alive at
every moment, and continually ready to lend himself to the comfort and
solace of his companions. Sitting in their dingy London house, the
spirit of dulness had drawn a curtain between them and the sun; and
neither thought nor event had penetrated the fortification of silence
and neglect which environed them. Edward Villiers came; and as mist
flies before the wind, so did all Ethel's depression disappear when his
voice only met her ear: his step on the stairs announced happiness; and
when he was indeed before her, light and day displaced every remnant of
cheerless obscurity.

The abstracted, wounded, yet lofty spirit of Lodore was totally dissimilar
to the airy brightness of Villiers' disposition. Lodore had outlived a
storm, and shown himself majestic in ruin. No ill had tarnished the
nature of Villiers: he enjoyed life, he was in good-humour with the
world, and thought well of mankind. Lodore had endangered his peace from
the violence of passion, and reaped misery from the pride of his soul.
Villiers was imprudent from his belief in the goodness of his
fellow-creatures, and imparted happiness from the store that his warm
heart insured to himself. The one had never been a boy--the other had
not yet learned to be a man.

Ethel's heart had been filled by her father; and all affection, all
interest, borrowed their force from his memory. She did not think of
love; and while Villiers was growing into a part of her life, becoming
knit to her existence by daily habit, and a thousand thoughts expended on
him, she entertained his idea chiefly as having been the friend of Lodore.
"He is certainly the kindest-hearted creature in the world." This was
the third time that, when laying her gentle head on the pillow, this
feeling came like a blessing to her closing eyes. She heard his voice in
the silence of night, even more distinctly than when it was addressed to
her outward sense during the day. For the first time after the lapse of
months, she found one to whom she could spontaneously utter every
thought, as it rose in her mind. A fond, elder brother, if such ever
existed, cherishing the confidence and tenderness of a beloved sister,
might fill the place which her new friend assumed for Ethel. She thought
of him with overflowing affection; and the name of "Mr. Villiers"
sometimes fell from her lips in solitude, and hung upon her ear like
sweetest music. In early life there is a moment--perhaps of all the
enchantments of love it is the one which is never renewed--when passion,
unacknowledged to ourselves, imparts greater delight than any
after-stage of that ever-progressive sentiment. We neither wish nor
expect. A new joy has risen, like the sun, upon our lives; and we rejoice
in the radiance of morning, without adverting to the noon and twilight
that is to follow. Ethel stood on the threshold of womanhood: the door
of life had been closed before her;--again it was thrown open--and the
sudden splendour that manifested itself blinded her to the forms of the
objects of menace or injury, which a more experienced eye would have
discerned within the brightness of her new-found day.

Ethel expressed a wish to visit Eton. In talking of the past, Lord Lodore
had never adverted to any events except those which had occurred during his
boyish days. His youthful pleasures and exploits had often made a part
of their conversation. He had traced for her a plan of Eton college, and
the surrounding scenery; spoken of the trembling delight he had felt in
escaping from bounds; and told how he and Derham had passed happy hours
beside the clear streams, and beneath the copses, of that rural country.
There was one fountain which he delighted to celebrate; and the ivied
ruins of an old monastery, now become a part of a farm-yard, which had
been to these friends the bodily image of many imaginary scenes. Among
the sketches of Whitelock, were several taken in the vicinity of
Windsor; and there were, in his portfolio, studies of trees, cottages,
and also of this same abbey, which Lodore instantly recognized. To many
he had some appending anecdote, some school-boy association. He had
purchased the whole collection from Whitelock. Ethel had copied a few;
and these, together with various sketches made in the Illinois, formed
her dearest treasure, more precious in her eyes than diamonds and
rubies.

We are most jealous of what sits nearest to our hearts; and we must love
fondly before we can let another into the secret of those trivial, but
cherished emotions, which form the dearest portion of our solitary
meditations. Ethel had several times been on the point of proposing a
visit to Eton, to her aunt; but there was an awful sacredness in the
very name, which acted like a spell upon her imagination. When first it
fell from her lips, the word seemed echoed by unearthly whisperings, and
she fled from the idea of going thither,--as it is the feminine
disposition often to do, from the full accomplishment of its wishes, as
if disaster must necessarily be linked to the consummation of their
desires. But a word was enough for Villiers: he eagerly solicited
permission to escort them thither, as, being an Etonian himself, his
guidance would be of great advantage. Ethel faltered her consent; and
the struggle of delight and sensibility made that project appear
painful, which was indeed the darling of her thoughts.

On a bright day in the first week of May, they made this excursion. They
repaired to one of the inns at Salt Hill, and prolonged their walks and
drives about the country. In some of the former, where old walls were to
be scrambled up, and rivulets overleaped, Mrs. Elizabeth remained at the
hotel, and Ethel and Villiers pursued their rambles together. Ethel's
whole soul was given up to the deep filial love that had induced the
journey. Every green field was a stage on which her father had played a
part; each majestic tree, or humble streamlet, was hallowed by being
associated with his image. The pleasant, verdant beauty of the
landscape, clad in all the brightness of early summer; the sunny, balmy
day--the clouds which pranked the heavens with bright and floating
shapes--each hedgerow and each cottage, with its trim garden--each
embowered nook--had a voice which was music to her soul. From the
college of Eton, they sought the dame's house where Lodore and Derham had
lived; then crossing the bridge, they entered Windsor, and prolonged
their walk into the forest. Ethel knew even the rustic names of the
spots she most desired to visit, and to these Villiers led her in
succession. Day declined before they got home, and found Mrs. Elizabeth,
and their repast, waiting them; and the evening was enlivened by many a
tale of boyish pranks, achieved by Villiers, in these scenes. The
following morning they set forth again; and three days were spent in
these delightful wanderings. Ethel would willingly never have quitted
this spot: it appeared to her as if, seeing all, still much remained to
be seen--as if she could never exhaust the variety of sentiments and
deep interest which endeared every foot of this to her so holy ground.
Nor were her emotions silent, and the softness of her voice, and the
flowing eloquence with which she expressed herself, formed a new charm
for her companion.

Sometimes her heart was too full to admit of expression, and grief for
her father's loss was renewed in all its pristine bitterness. One day,
on feeling herself thus overcome, she quitted her companions, and sought
the shady walks of the garden of the hotel, to indulge in a gush of
sorrow which she could not repress. There was something in her gesture
and manner as she left them, that reminded Villiers of Lady Lodore. It was
one of those mysterious family resemblances, which are so striking and
powerful, and yet which it is impossible to point out to a stranger. A
_bligh_ (as this indescribable resemblance is called in some parts of
England) of her mother-struck Villiers forcibly, and he suddenly asked
Mrs. Elizabeth, "If Miss Fitzhenry had never expressed a desire to see
Lady Lodore."

"God forbid!" exclaimed the old lady; "it was my brother's dying wish, that
she should never hear Lady Lodore's name, and I have religiously observed
it. Ethel only knows that she was the cause of her father's misfortunes,
that she deserted every duty, and is unworthy of the name she bears."

Villiers was astonished at this tirade falling from the lips of the
unusually placid maiden, whose heightened colour bespoke implacable
resentment. "Do not mention that woman's name, Mr. Villiers," she
continued, "I am convinced that I should die on the spot if I saw her;
she is as much a murderess, as if she had stabbed her husband to the
heart with a dagger. Her letter to me that I sent to my poor brother in
America, was more the cause of his death, I am sure, than all the duels
in the world. Lady Lodore! I often wonder a thunderbolt from heaven does
not fall on and kill her!"

Mrs. Elizabeth's violence was checked by seeing Ethel cross the road to
return. "Promise not to mention her name to my niece," she cried.

"For the present be assured that I will not," Villiers answered. He had
been struck most painfully by some of Mrs. Elizabeth's expressions, they
implied so much more of misconduct on Lady Lodore's part, than he had ever
suspected--but she must know best; and it seemed to him, indeed, the
probable interpretation of the mystery that enveloped her separation
from her husband. The account spread by Lady Santerre, and current in
the world, appeared inadequate and improbable; Lodore would not have
dared to take her child from her, but on heavier grounds; it was then
true, that a dark and disgraceful secret was hidden in her heart, and
that her propriety, her good reputation, her seeming pride of innocence,
were but the mask to cover the reality that divided her from her
daughter for ever.

Villiers was well acquainted with Lady Lodore; circumstances had caused him
to take a deep interest in her--these were now at an end: but the singular
coincidences that had brought him in contact with her daughter, renewed
many forgotten images, and caused him to dwell on the past with mixed
curiosity and uneasiness. Mrs. Elizabeth's expressions added to the
perplexity of his ideas; their chief effect was to tarnish to his mind
the name of Lady Lodore, and to make him rejoice at the termination that
had been put to their more intimate connexion.




CHAPTER II


One, within whose subtle being,
As light and wind within some delicate cloud,
That fades amid the blue noon's burning sky.
Genius and youth contended.

SHELLEY.


The party returned to town, and on the following evening they went to
the Italian Opera. For the first time since her father's death, Ethel
threw aside her mourning attire: for the first time also, she made one
of the audience at the King's Theatre. She went to hear the music, and
to spend the evening with the only person in the world who was drawn
towards her by feelings of kindness and sympathy--the only person--but
that sufficed. His being near her, was the occasion of more delight than
if she had been made the associate of regal splendour. Yet it was no
defined or disturbing sentiment, that sat so lightly on her bosom and
shone in her eyes. Her's was the first gentle opening of a girl's heart,
who does not busy herself with the future, and reposes on the serene
present with unquestioning confidence. She looked round on the gay world
assembled, and thought, "All are as happy as I am." She listened to the
music with a subdued but charmed spirit, and turned now and then to her
companions with a glad smile, expressive of her delight. Fewer words
were spoken in their little box, probably than in any in the house; but
in none were congregated three hearts so guileless, and so perfectly
satisfied with the portion allotted to them.

At length both opera and ballêt were over, and, leaning on the arm of
Villiers, the ladies entered the round-room. The house had been very
full and the crowd was great. A seat was obtained for Aunt Bessy on one
of the sofas near the door, which opened on the principal staircase.
Villiers and Ethel stood near her. When the crowd had thinned a little,
Villiers went to look for the servant, and Ethel remained surveying the
moving numbers with curiosity, wondering at her own fate, that while
every one seemed familiar one to the other, she knew, and was known by,
none. She did not repine at this; Villiers had dissipated the sense of
desertion which before haunted her, and she was much entertained, as she
heard the remarks and interchange of compliments going on about her. Her
attention was particularly attracted by a very beautiful woman, or
rather girl she seemed, standing on the other side of the room,
conversing with a very tall personage, to whom she, being not above the
middle size, looked up as she talked; which action, perhaps, added to
her youthful appearance. There was an ease in her manners that bespoke a
matron as to station. She was dressed very simply in white, without any
ornament; her cloak hung carelessly from her shoulders, and gave to view
her round symmetrical figure; her silky, chesnut-coloured hair, fell in
thick ringlets round her face, and was gathered with inimitable elegance
in large knots on the top of her head. There was something bewitching in
her animated smile, and sensibility beamed from her long and dark grey
eyes; her simple gesture as she placed her little hand on her cloak, her
attitude as she stood, were wholly unpretending, but graceful beyond
measure. Ethel watched her unobserved, with admiration and interest, so
that she almost forgot where she was, until the voice of Villiers
recalled her. "Your carriage is up--will you come?" The lady turned as
he spoke, and recognized him with a cordial and most sweet smile. They
moved on, while Ethel turned back to look again, as her carriage was
loudly called, and Mrs. Elizabeth seizing her arm, whispered out of
breath, "O my dear, do make haste!" She hurried on, therefore, and her
glance was momentary; but she saw with wonder, that the lady was looking
with eagerness at the party; she caught Ethel's eye, blushed and turned
away, while the folding doors closed, and with a kind of nervous
trepidation her companions descended the stairs. In a moment the ladies
were in their carriage, which drove off, while Mrs. Elizabeth exclaimed
in the tone of one aghast, "Thank God, we got away! O, Ethel, that was
Lady Lodore!"

"My mother!--impossible!"

"O, that we had never come to town," continued her aunt. "Long have I
prayed that I might never see her again;--and she looking as if nothing
had happened, and that Lodore had not died through her means! Wicked,
wicked woman! I will not stay in London a day longer!"

Ethel did not interrupt her ravings: she remembered Captain Markham, and
could not believe but that her aunt laboured under some similar mistake;
it was ridiculous to imagine, that this girlish-looking, lovely being,
had been the wife of her father, whom she remembered with his high
forehead rather bare of hair, his deep marked countenance, his look that
bespoke more than mature age. Her aunt was mistaken, she felt sure; and
yet when she closed her eyes, the beautiful figure she had seen stole,
according to the Arabian image, beneath her lids, and smiled sweetly,
and again started forward to look after her. This little act seemed to
confirm what Mrs. Elizabeth said; and yet, again, it was impossible!
"Had she been named my sister, there were something in it--but my
mother,--impossible!"

Yet strange as it seemed, it was so; in this instance, Mrs. Elizabeth
had not deceived herself; and thus it was that two so near of kin as
mother and daughter, met, it might be said, for the first time. Villiers
was inexpressibly shocked; and believing that Lady Lodore must suffer
keenly from so strange and unnatural an incident, his first kindly impulse
was to seek to see her on the following morning. During her absence, the
violent attack of her sister-in-law had weighed with him, but her look
at once dissipated his uneasy doubts. There was that in this lady, which
no man could resist; she had joined to her beauty, the charm of engaging
manners, made up of natural grace, vivacity, intuitive tact, and soft
sensibility, which infused a kind of idolatry into the admiration with
which she was universally regarded. But it was not the beauty and
fashion of Lady Lodore which caused Villiers to take a deep interest in
her. His intercourse with her had been of long standing, and the object
of his very voyage to America was intimately connected with her.

Edward Villiers was the son of a man of fortune. His father had been
left a widower young in life, with this only child, who, thus single and
solitary in his paternal home, became almost adopted into the family of
his mother's brother, Viscount Maristow. This nobleman being rich,
married, and blessed with a numerous progeny, the presence of little
Edward was not felt as a burthen, and he was brought up with his cousins
like one of them. Among these it would have been hard if Villiers could
not have found an especial friend: this was not the elder son, who, much
his senior, looked down upon him with friendly regard; it was the
second, who was likewise several years older. Horatio Saville was a
being fashioned for every virtue and distinguished by every excellence;
to know that a thing was right to be done, was enough to impel Horatio
to go through fire and water to do it; he was one of those who seem not
to belong to this world, yet who adorn it most; conscientious, upright,
and often cold in seeming, because he could always master his passions;
good over-much, he might be called, but that there was no pedantry nor
harshness in his nature. Resolute, aspiring, and true, his noble
purposes and studious soul, demanded a frame of iron, and he had one of
the frailest mechanism. It was not that he was not tall, well-shaped,
with earnest eyes, a brow built up high to receive and entertain a
capacious mind; but he was thin and shadowy, a hectic flushed his cheek,
and his voice was broken and mournful. At school he held the topmost
place, at college he was distinguished by the energy with which he
pursued his studies; and these, so opposite from what might have been
expected to be the pursuits of his ardent mind, were abstruse
metaphysics--the highest and most theoretical mathematics, and
cross-grained argument, based upon hair-fine logic; to these he addicted
himself. His desire was knowledge; his passion truth; his eager and
never-sleeping endeavour was to inform and to satisfy his understanding.
Villiers waited on him, as an inferior spirit may attend on an
archangel, and gathered from him the crumbs of his knowledge, with
gladness and content. He could not force his boyish mind to similar
exertions, nor feel that keen thirst for knowledge that kept alive his
cousin's application, though he could admire and love these with
fervour, when exhibited in another. It was indeed a singular fact, that
this constant contemplation of so superior a being, added to his
careless turn of mind. Not to be like Horatio was to be nothing--to be
like him was impossible. So he was content to remain one of the
half-ignorant, uninformed creatures most men are, and to found his pride
upon his affection for his cousin, who, being several years older, might
well be advanced even beyond his emulation. Horatio himself did not
desire to be imitated by the light-hearted Edward; he was too familiar
with the exhaustion, the sadness, the disappointment of his pursuits; he
could not be otherwise himself, but he thought all that he aspired
after, was well exchanged for the sparkling eyes, exhaustless spirits,
and buoyant step of Villiers. We none of us wish to exchange our
identity for that of another; yet we are never satisfied with ourselves.
The unknown has always a charm, and unless blinded by miserable vanity,
we know ourselves too well to appreciate our especial characteristics at
a very high rate. When Horace, after deep midnight study, felt his brain
still working like a thousand millwheels, that cannot be stopped; when
sleep fled from him, and yet his exhausted mind could no longer continue
its labours--he envied the light slumbers of his cousin, which followed
exercise and amusement. Villiers loved and revered him; and he felt
drawn closer to him than towards any of his brothers, and strove to
refine his taste and regulate his conduct through his admonitions and
example, while he abstained from following him in the steep and thorny
path he had selected.

Horatio quitted college; he was no longer a youth, and his manhood
became as studious as his younger days. He had no desire but for
knowledge, no thought but for the nobler creations of the soul, and the
discernment of the sublime laws of God and nature. He nourished the
ambition of showing to these latter days what scholars of old had been,
though this feeling was subservient to his instinctive love of learning,
and his wish to adorn his mind with the indefeasible attributes of
truth. He was universally respected and loved, though little understood.
His young cousin Edward only was aware of the earnestness of his
affections, and the sensibility that nestled itself in his warm heart.
He was outwardly mild, placid, and forbearing, and thus obtained the
reputation of being cold--though those who study human nature ought to
make it their first maxim, that those who are tolerant of the follies of
their fellows--who sympathize with, and assist their wishes, and who
apparently forget their own desires, as they devote themselves to the
accomplishment of those of their friends, must have the quickest
feelings to make them enter into and understand those of others, and the
warmest affections to be able to conquer their wayward humours, so that
they can divest themselves of selfishness, and incorporate in their own
being the pleasures and pains of those around them.

The sparkling eye, the languid step, and flushed cheek of Horatio
Saville, were all tokens that there burnt within him a spirit too strong
for his frame; but he never complained; or if he ever poured out his
pent-up emotions, it was in the ear of Edward only; who but partly
understood him, but who loved him entirely. What that thirst for
knowledge was that preyed on him, and for ever urged him to drink of the
purest streams of wisdom, and yet which ever left him unsatisfied,
fevered, and mournful, the gay spirit of Edward Villiers could not
guess: often he besought his cousin to close his musty books, to mount a
rapid horse, to give his studies to the winds, and deliver his soul to
nature. But Horace pointed to some unexplained passage in Plato the
divine, or some undiscovered problem in the higher sciences, and turned
his eyes from the sun; or if indeed he yielded, and accompanied his
youthful friend, some appearance of earth or air would awaken his
curiosity, rouze his slumbering mind again to inquire, and making his
study of the wide cope of heaven, he gave himself up to abstruse
meditation, while nominally seeking for relaxation from his heavier
toils.

Horatio Saville was nine-and-twenty when he first met Lady Lodore, who was
nearly the same age. He had begun to feel that his health was shaken,
and he tried to forget for a time his devouring avocations. He changed
the scene, and went on a visit to a friend, who had a country house not
far from Hastings. Lady Lodore was expected as a guest, together with
her mother. She was much talked of, having become an object of interest
or curiosity to the many. A mystery hung over her fate; but her
reputation was cloudless, and she was warmly supported by the leaders of
fashion. Saville heard of her beauty and her sufferings; the injustice
with which she had been treated--of her magnanimity and desolate
condition; he heard of her talents, her powers of conversation, her
fashion. He figured to himself (as we are apt to incarnate to our
imagination the various qualities of a human being, of whom we hear
much) a woman, brilliant, but rather masculine, majestic in figure, with
wild dark eyes, and a very determined manner. Lady Lodore came: she
entered the room where he was sitting, and the fabric of his fancy was
at once destroyed. He saw a sweet-looking woman; serene, fair, and with
a countenance expressive of contented happiness. He found that her
manners were winning, from their softness; her conversation was
delightful, from its total want of pretension or impertinence.

What the power was that from the first moment they met, drew Horatio
Saville and Lady Lodore together is one of those natural secrets which it
is impossible to explain. Though a student, Saville was a gentleman, with
the manners and appearance of the better specimens of our aristocracy.
There might be something in his look of ill health, which demanded
sympathy; something in his superiority to the rest of the persons about
her, in the genius that sat on his brow, and the eloquence that flowed
from his lips; something in the contrast he presented to every one else
she had ever seen--neither entering into their gossiping slanders, nor
understanding their empty self-sufficiency, that possessed a charm for
one satiated with the world's common scene. It was less of wonder that
Cornelia pleased the student. There were no rough corners, no harshness
about her; she won her way into any heart by her cheerful smiles and
kind tones; and she listened to Saville when he talked of what other
women would have lent a languid ear to, with such an air of interest,
that he found no pleasure so great as that of talking on.

Saville was accustomed to find the men of his acquaintance ignorant. All
the knowledge of worldlings was as a point in comparison with his vast
acquirements. He did not seek Lady Lodore's society either to learn or to
teach, but to forget thought, and to feel himself occupied and diverted
from the sense of listlessness that haunted him in society, without
having recourse to the, to him dangerous, attraction of his books.

Lady Lodore had, in the very brightness of her earliest youth, selected a
proud and independent position. She had refused to bend to her husband's
will, or to submit to the tyranny, as she named it, which he had attempted
to exercise. Youth is bold and fearless. The forked tongue of scandal, the
thousand ills with which woman is threatened in society, without a guide
or a protector--all the worldly considerations which might lead her to
unite herself again to her husband, she had rejected with unbounded
disdain. Her mother was there to stand between her and the shafts of
envy and calumny, and she conceived no mistrust of herself; she believed
that she could hold her course with taintless feelings and security of
soul, through a thousand dangers. At first she had been somewhat annoyed
by ill-natured observations, but Lady Santerre poured the balm of
flattery on her wounds, and a few tears shed in her presence dissipated
the gathering cloud.

Cornelia had every motive a woman could have for guarding her conduct
from reproach. She lived in the midst of polished society, and was
thoroughly imbued with its maxims and laws. She witnessed the downfall
of several, as young and lovely as herself, and heard the sarcasms and
beheld the sneers which were heaped as a tomb above their buried fame.
She had vowed to herself never to become one of these. She was applauded
for her pride, and held up as a pattern. No one feared her. She was no
coquette, though she strove universally to please. She formed no
intimate friendships, though every man felt honoured by her notice. She
had no prudery on her lips, but her conduct was as open and as fair as
day. Here lay her defence against her husband; and she preserved even
the outposts of such bulwarks with scrupulous yet unobtrusive
exactitude.

Her spirits, as well as her spirit, held her up through many a year. More
than ten years had passed since her separation from Lodore--a long time
to tell of; but it had glided away, she scarcely knew how--taking little
from her loveliness, adding to the elegance of her appearance, and the
grace of her manners. Season after season came, and went, and she had no
motive for counting them anxiously. She was sought after and admired; it
was a holiday life for her, and she wondered what people meant when they
spoke of the delusions of this world, and the dangers of our own hearts.
She saw a gay reality about her, and felt the existence of no internal
enemy. Nothing ever moved her to sorrow, except the reflection that now
and then came across, that she had a child--divorced for ever from her
maternal bosom. The sight of a baby cradled in its mother's arms, or
stretching out its little hands to her, had not unoften caused her to
turn abruptly away, to hide her tears; and once or twice she had been
obliged to quit a theatre to conceal her emotion, when such sentiments
were brought too vividly before her. But when her eyes were drowned in
tears, and her bosom heaved with sad emotion, pride came to check the
torrent, and hatred of her oppressor gave a new impulse to her swelling
heart.

She had rather avoided female friendships, and had been warned from them
by the treachery of one, and the misconduct of another, of her more
intimate acquaintances. Lady Lodore renounced friendship, but the world
began to grow a little dull. The frivolity of one, the hard-heartedness of
another, disgusted. She saw each occupied by themselves and their
families, and she was alone. Balls and assemblies palled upon
her--country pleasures were stupid--she had began to think all things
"stale and unprofitable," when she became acquainted with Horatio
Saville. She was glad again to feel animated with a sense of living
enjoyment; she congratulated herself on the idea that she could take
interest in some one thing or person among the empty shapes that
surrounded her; and without a thought beyond the amusement of the
present moment, most of her hours were spent in his company.




CHAPTER III


Ah now, ye gentle pair,--now think awhile,
Now, while ye still can think and still can smile.
* * *
So did they think
Only with graver thoughts, and smiles reduced.

LEIGH HUNT.


A month stole away as if it had been a day, and Lady Lodore was engaged to
pass some weeks with another friend in a distant county. It was easily
contrived, without contrivance, by Saville, that he should visit a
relation who lived within a morning's ride of her new abode. The
restriction placed upon their intercourse while residing under different
roofs contrasted painfully with the perfect freedom they had enjoyed
while inhabiting the same. Their attachment was too young and too
unacknowledged to need the zest of difficulty. It required indeed the
facility of an unobstructed path for it to proceed to the accustomed
bourne; and a straw thrown across was sufficient to check its course for
ever.

The impatience and restlessness which Cornelia experienced during her
journey; the rush of transport that thrilled through her when she heard
of Saville's arrival at a neighbouring mansion, awoke her in an instant
to a knowledge of the true state of her heart. Her pride was, happily
for herself, united to presence of mind and fortitude. She felt the
invasion of the enemy, and she lost not a moment in repelling the
dangers that menaced her. She resolved to be true to the line of conduct
she had marked out for herself--she determined not to love. She did not
alter her manner nor her actions. She met Horatio with the same sweet
smile--she conversed with the same kind interest; but she did not
indulge in one dream, one thought--one reverie (sweet food of love)
during his absence, and guarded over herself that no indication of any
sentiment less general than the friendship of society might appear.
Though she was invariably kind, yet his feelings told him that she was
changed, without his being able to discover where the alteration lay;
the line of demarcation, which she took care never to pass, was too
finely traced, for any but feminine tact to discern, though it
obstructed him as if it had been as high and massive as a city wall. Now
and then his speaking eye rested on her with a pleading glance, while
she answered his look with a frank smile, that spoke a heart at ease,
and perfect self-possession. Indeed, while they remained near each
other, in despite of all her self-denying resolves, Cornelia was happy.
She felt that there was one being in the world who took a deep and
present interest in her, whose thoughts hovered round her and whose mind
she could influence to the conception of any act or feeling she might
desire. That tranquillity yet animation of spirit--that gratitude on
closing her eyes at night--that glad anticipation of the morrow's
sun--that absence of every harsh and jarring emotion, which is the
disposition of the human soul the nearest that we can conceive to
perfect happiness, and which now and then visits sad humanity, to teach
us of what unmeasured and pure joy our fragile nature is capable,
attended her existence, and made each hour of the day a new-born
blessing.

This state of things could not last. An accident revealed to Saville the
true state of his heart; he became aware that he loved Cornelia, deeply
and fervently, and from that moment he resolved to exile himself for
ever from her dear presence. Misery is the child of love when happiness
is not; this Horatio felt, but he did not shrink from the endurance. All
abstracted and lofty as his speculations were, still his place had been
in the hot-bed of patrician society, and he was familiar with the
repetition of domestic revolutions, too frequent there. For worlds he
would not have Cornelia's name become a byeword and mark for
scandal--that name which she had so long kept bright and unreachable.
His natural modesty prevented him from entertaining the idea that he
could indeed destroy her peace; but he knew how many and easy are the
paths which lead to the loss of honour in the world's eyes. That it
could be observed and surmised that one man had approached Lady Lodore with
any but sentiments of reverence, was an evil to be avoided at any cost.
Saville was firm as rock in his resolves--he neither doubted nor
procrastinated. He left the neighbourhood where she resided, and,
returning to his father's house, tried to acquire strength to bear the
severe pain which he could not master.

His gentle and generous nature, ever thoughtful for others, and prodigal
of self, was not however satisfied with this mere negative act of
justice towards one who honoured him, he felt conscious, with her
friendship and kindest thoughts. He was miserable in the idea that he
could not further serve her. He revolved a thousand plans in his mind,
tending to her advantage. In fancy he entered the solitude of her
meditations, and tried to divine what her sorrows or desires were, that
he might minister to their solace or accomplishment. Their previous
intercourse had been very unreserved, and though Cornelia spoke but
distantly and coldly of Lodore, she frequently mentioned her child, and
lamented, with much emotion, the deprivation of all those joys which
maternal love bestows. Often had Saville said, "Why not appeal more
strongly to Lord Lodore? or, if he be inflexible, why calmly endure an
outrage shocking to humanity? The laws of your country may assist you."

"They would not," said Cornelia, "for his reply would be so fraught with
seeming justice, that the blame would fall back on me. He asks but the
trivial sacrifice of my duty to my mother--my poor mother! who, since I
was born, has lived with me and for me, and who has no existence except
through me. I am to tear away, and to trample upon the first of human
ties, to render myself worthy of the guardianship of my child! I cannot
do it--I should hold myself a parricide. Do not let us talk more of
these things; endurance is the fate of woman, and if I have more than my
share, let us hope that some other poor creature, less able to bear, has
her portion lightened in consequence. I should be glad if once indeed I
were permitted to see my cherub girl, though it were only while she
slept; but an ocean rolls between us, and patience must be my
comforter."

The soft sweetness of her look and voice, the angelic grace that
animated every tone and glance, rendered these maternal complaints
mournful, yet enchanting music to the ear of Saville. He could have
listened for ever. But when exiled from her, they assumed another form. He
began to think whether it were not possible to convince Lord Lodore of the
inexcusable cruelty of his conduct; and again and again, he imaged the
exultation of heart he should feel, if he could succeed in placing her
lost babe in the mother's arms.

Saville was the frankest of human beings. Finding his cousin Edward on a
visit at Maristow castle, he imparted his project to him, of making a
voyage to America, seeking out Lord Lodore, and using every argument and
persuasion to induce him to restore her daughter to his wife. Villiers
was startled at the mention of this chivalrous intent. What could have
rouzed the studious Horace to such sudden energy? By one of those
strange caprices of the human mind, which bring forth discord instead of
harmony, Edward had never liked Lady Lodore--he held her to be false and
dangerous. Circumstances had brought him more in contact with her mother
than herself, and the two were associated and confounded in his mind,
till he heard Lady Santerre's falsetto voice in the sweet one of
Cornelia, and saw her deceitful vulgar devices in the engaging manners
of her daughter. He was struck with horror when he discovered that
Saville loved, nay, idolized this beauteous piece of mischief, as he
would have named her. He saw madness and folly in his Quixotic
expedition, and argued against it with all his might. It would not do;
Horatio was resolved to dedicate himself to the happiness of her he
loved; and since this must be done in absence and distance, what better
plan than to restore to her the precious treasure of which she had been
robbed?

Saville resolved to cross the Atlantic, and, though opposed to his
scheme, Villiers offered to accompany him. A voyage to America was but a
trip to an active and unoccupied young man; the society of his cousin
would render the journey delightful; he preferred it at all times to the
commoner pleasures of life, and besides, on this occasion, he was
animated with the hope of being useful to him. There was nothing
effeminate in Saville. His energy of purpose and depth of thought
forbade the idea. Still there was something that appeared to require
kindness and support. His delicate health, of which he took no care,
demanded feminine attentions; his careless reliance upon the uprightness
of others, and total self-oblivion, often hurried him to the brink of
dangers; and though fearlessness and integrity were at hand to extricate
him, Edward, who knew his keen sensibility and repressed quickness of
temper, was not without fear, that on so delicate a mission his ardent
feelings might carry him beyond the mark, and that, in endeavouring to
serve a woman whom he loved with enthusiastic adoration, he might rouze
the angry passions of her husband.

With such feelings the cousins crossed the Atlantic and arrived at New
York. Thence they proceeded to the west of America, and passing and his
daughter on the road without knowing it, arrived at the Illinois after
their departure. They were astonished to find that Mr. Fitzhenry, as he
was named to them, had broken up his establishment, sold his farm, and
departed with the intention of returning to Europe. What this change
might portend they could not guess. Whether it were the result of any
communication with Lady Lodore--whether a reconciliation was under
discussion, or whether it were occasioned by caprice merely they could
not tell; at any rate, it seemed to put an end to Saville's mediation.
If Lodore returned to England, it was probable that Cornelia would
herself make an exertion to have her child restored to her. Whether he
could be of any use was problematical, but untimely interference was to
be deprecated; events must be left to take their own course: Saville was
scarcely himself aware how glad he was to escape any kind of intercourse
with the husband of Cornelia.

This feeling, however unacknowledged, became paramount with him. Now that
Lodore was about to leave America, he wished to linger in it; he planned a
long tour through the various states, he studied their laws and customs,
he endeavoured to form a just estimate of the institutions of the New
World, and their influence on those governed by them.

Edward had little sympathy in these pursuits; he was eager to return to
London, and felt more inclined to take his gun and shoot in the forests,
than to mingle in the society of the various towns. This difference of
taste caused the cousins at various times to separate. Saville was at
Washington when Villiers made a journey to the borders of Canada, to the
falls of the Niagara, and returned by New York; a portion of the United
States which his cousin avoided visiting, until Lodore should have quitted
it.

Thus it was that a strange combination of circumstances brought Villiers
into contact with this unfortunate nobleman, and made him a witness of
and a participator in the closing scene of his disastrous and wasted
life. Villiers did not sympathize in his cousin's admiration of
Cornelia, and was easily won to take a deep interest in the fortunes of her
husband. The very aspect of Lodore commanded attention; his voice entered
the soul: ill-starred, and struck by calamity, he rose majestically from
the ruin around him, and seemed to defy fate. The first thought that
struck Villiers was, how could Lady Lodore desert such a man; how
pitifully degraded must she be, who preferred the throng of fools to the
society of so matchless a being! The gallantry with which he rushed to
his fate, his exultation in the prospect of redeeming his honour, his
melting tenderness towards his daughter, filled Villiers with respect
and compassion. It was all over now. Lodore was dead: his passions, his
wrongs, his errors slept with him in the grave. He had departed from the
busy stage, never to be forgotten--yet to be seen no more.

Lodore was dead, and Cornelia was free. Her husband had alluded to the
gladness with which she would welcome liberty; and Villiers knew that there
was another, also, whose heart would rejoice, and open itself at once to
the charming visitation of permitted love. Villiers sighed to think that
Saville would marry the beautiful widow; but he did not doubt that this
event would take place.

Having seen that Ethel was in kind hands, and learnt the satisfactory
arrangements made for her return to England, he hastened to join his
cousin, and to convey the astounding intelligence. Saville's generous
disposition prevented exultation, and subdued joy. Still the prospect of
future happiness became familiar to him, shadowed only by the fear of
not obtaining the affections of her he so fervently loved. For, strange
to say, Saville was diffident to a fault: he could not imagine any
qualities in himself to attract a beautiful and fashionable woman. His
hopes were slight; his thoughts timid: the pain of eternal division was
replaced by the gentler anxieties of love; and he returned to England,
scarcely daring to expect that crown to his desires, which seemed too
high an honour, too dear a blessing, for earthly love to merit.




CHAPTER IV


Ma la fede degli Amanti
È come l'Araba fenice;
Che vi sia, ciaschun' lo dice.
Ma dove sia, nessun lo sa.

METASTASIO.


Meanwhile Lady Lodore had been enduring the worst miseries of ill-fated
love. The illness of Lady Santerre, preceding her death, had demanded all
her time; and she nursed her with exemplary patience and kindness. During
her midnight watchings and solitary days, she had full time to feel how
deep a wound her heart had received. The figure and countenance of her
absent friend haunted her in spite of every effort; and when death
hovered over the pillow of her mother, she clung, with mad desperation,
to the thought, that there was still one, when this parent should be
gone, to love her, even though she never saw him more.

Lady Santerre died. After the first burst of natural grief, Cornelia
began to reflect that Lord Lodore might now imagine that every obstacle to
their reconciliation was removed. She had looked upon her husband as her
enemy and injurer; she had regarded him with indignation and fear;--but
now she hated him. Strong aversion had sprung up, during the struggles
of passion, in her bosom. She hated him as the eternal barrier between
her and one who loved her with rare disinterestedness. The human heart
must desire happiness;--in spite of every effort at resignation, it must
aspire to the fulfilment of its wish. Lord Lodore was the cause why she
was cut off from it for ever. He had foreseen that this feeling, this
combat, this misery, would be her doom, in the deserted situation she
chose for herself: she had laughed his fears to scorn. Now she abhorred
him the more for having divined her destiny. While she banished the
pleasant thoughts of love, she indulged in the poisoned ones of hate;
and while she resisted each softer emotion as a crime, she opened her
heart to the bitterest resentment, as a permitted solace; nor was she
aware that thus she redoubled all her woes. It was under the influence
of these feelings, that she had written to Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry that
harsh, decided letter, which Lodore received at New York. The
intelligence of his violent death came as an answer to her expressions
of implacable resentment. A pang of remorse stung her, when she thought
how she had emptied the vials of her wrath on a head which had so soon
after been laid low for ever.

The double loss of husband and mother caused Lady Lodore to seclude
herself, not in absolute solitude, but in the agreeable retreat of friendly
society. She was residing near Brighton, when Saville returned from
America, and, with a heart beating high with its own desires, again
beheld the mistress of his affections. His delicate nature caused him to
respect the weeds she wore, even though they might be termed a mockery:
they were the type of her freedom and his hopes; yet, as the tokens of
death, they were to be respected. He saw her more beautiful than ever,
more courted, more waited on; and he half despaired. How could he, the
abstracted student, the man of dreams, the sensitive and timid invalid,
ensnare the fancy of one formed to adorn the circles of wealth and
fashion?

Thus it was that Saville and Cornelia were further off than ever, when
they imagined themselves most near. Neither of them could afterwards
comprehend what divided them; or why, when each would have died for the
other's sake, cobweb barriers should have proved inextricable; and
wherefore, after weathering every more stormy peril, they should perish
beneath the influence of a summer breeze.

The pride of Cornelia's heart, hid by the artificial courtesies of
society, was a sentiment resolved, confirmed, active, and far beyond her
own controul. The smallest opposition appeared rebellion to her majesty
of will; while her own caprices, her own desires, were sacred decrees.
She was too haughty to admit of discussion--too firmly intrenched in a
sense of what was due to her, not to start indignantly from
remonstrance. It is true, all this was but a painted veil. She was
tremblingly alive to censure, and wholly devoted to the object of her
attachment; but Saville was unable to understand these contradictions.
His modesty led him to believe, that he, of all men, was least
calculated to excite love in a woman's bosom. He saw in Cornelia a
beautiful creation, to admire and adore; but he was slow to perceive the
tenderness of soul, which her disposition made her anxious to conceal,
and he was conscious of no qualities in himself that could entitle him
to a place in her affections. Except that he loved her, what merit had
he? And the interests of his affection he was willing to sacrifice at
the altar of her wishes, though his life should be the oblation
necessary to insure their accomplishment.

This is not the description of true love on either side; for, to be
perfect, that sentiment ought to exist through the entireness of mutual
sympathy and trust: but not the less did their passionate attachment
engross the minds of both. All might have been well, indeed, had the
lovers been left to themselves; but friends and relations interfered to
mar and to destroy. The sisters of Saville accused Lady Lodore of
encouraging, and intending to marry, the Marquess of C--. Saville instantly
resolved to be no obstacle in the way of her ambition. Cornelia was fired
with treble indignation to perceive that he at once conceded the place to
his rival. One word or look of gentleness would have changed this; but she
resolved to vanquish by other arms, and to force him to show some
outward sign of jealousy and resentment. Saville had a natural dignity
of mind, founded on simplicity of heart and directness of purpose.
Cornelia knew that he loved her;--on that his claim rested: all that
might be done to embellish and elevate her existence, he would study to
achieve; but he could not enter into, nor understand, the puerile
fancies of a spoiled Beauty: and while she was exerting all her powers,
and succeeded in fascinating a crowd of flatterers, she saw Saville
apart, abstracted from such vanities, pursuing a silent course; ready to
approach her when her attention was disengaged, but at no time making
one among her ostentatious admirers.

There was no moment of her life in which Cornelia did not fully
appreciate her lover's value, and her own good fortune in having
inspired him with a serious and faithful attachment. But she imagined
that this must be known and acknowledged; and that to ask any
demonstration of gratitude, was ungenerous and tyrannical. An untaught
girl could not have acted with more levity and wilfulness. It was worse
when she found that she was accused of encouraging a wealthier and more
illustrious rival. She disdained to exculpate herself from the charge of
such low ambition, but rather furnished new grounds for accusation; and,
in the arrogance of conscious power, smiled at the pettiness of the
attempts made to destroy her influence. Proud in the belief that she
could in an instant dispel the clouds she had conjured athwart her
heaven, she cared not how ominously the thunder muttered, nor how dark
and portentous lowered the threatening storm. It came when she least
expected it: convinced of the fallacy of his confidence, made miserable
by her caprices, agonized by the idea that he only lingered to add
another trophy to his rival's triumph, Saville, who was always impetuous
and precipitate, suddenly quitted England.

This was a severe blow at first; but soon Cornelia smiled at it. He
would return--he must. The sincerity of their mutual preference would
overcome the petty obstacles of time and distance. She never felt more
sure of his devotion than now; and she looked so happy, and spoke so
gaily, that those who were more ready to discern indifference, than
love, in her sentiments, assured the absent Saville, that Lady Lodore
rejoiced at his absence, as having shaken off a burthen, and got rid of an
impediment, which, in spite of herself, was a clog to her brilliant
career. The trusting love that painted her face in smiles was a traitor
to itself and while she rose each day in the belief that the one was
near at hand which would bring her lover before her, dearer and more
attached than ever, she was in reality at work in defacing the whole web
of life, and substituting dark, blank, and sad disappointment, for the
images of light and joy with which her fancy painted it.

Saville had been gone five months. It was strange that he did not
return; and she began to ponder upon how she must unbend, and what
demonstration she must make, to attract him again to her side. The
Marquess of C--was dismissed; and she visited the daughters of Lord
Maristow, to learn what latest news they had received of their brother.
"Do you know, Lady Lodore," said Sophia Saville, "that this is Horatio's
wedding-day? It is too true: we regret it, because he weds a
foreigner--but there is no help now. He is married."

Had sudden disease seized on the frame-work of her body, and dissolved
and scattered with poisonous influence and unutterable pains, the atoms
that composed it, Lady Lodore would have been less agonized, less
terrified. A thousand daggers were at once planted in her bosom. Saville
was false! married! divided from her for ever! She was stunned:--scarcely
understanding the meaning of the phrases addressed to her, and, unable
to conceal her perturbation, she replied at random, and hastened to
shorten her visit.

But no interval of doubt or hope was afforded. The words she had heard
were concise, true to their meaning and all-sufficing. Her heart died
within her. What had she done? Was she the cause? She longed to learn
all the circumstances that led to this hasty marriage, and whether
inconstancy or resentment had impelled him to the fatal act. Yet
wherefore ask these things? It was over; the scene was closed. It were
little worth to analyze the poison she had imbibed, since she was past
all mortal cure.

Her first resolve was to forget--never, never to think of the false one
more. But her thoughts never wandered from his image, and she was
eternally busied in retrospection and conjecture. She was tempted at one
time to disbelieve the intelligence, and to consider it as a piece of
malice on the part of Miss Saville; then the common newspaper told her,
that at the Ambassador's house at Naples, the Honourable Horatio Saville
had married Clorinda, daughter of the Principe Villamarina, a Neapolitan
nobleman of the highest rank.

It was true therefore--and how was it true? Did he love his bride? why
else marry?--had he forgotten his tenderness towards her? Alas! it
needed not forgetting; it was a portion of past time, fleeting as time
itself; it had been borne away with the hours as they passed, and
remembered as a thing which had been, and was no more. The reveries of
love which for months had formed all her occupation, were a blank; or
rather to be replaced by the agonies of despair. Her native haughtiness
forsook her. She was alone and desolate--hedged in on all sides by
insuperable barriers, which shut out every glimpse of hope. She was
humbled in her own eyes, through her want of success, and heartily
despised herself, and all her caprices and vanities, which had led her
to this desart, and then left her to pine. She detested her position in
society, her mechanism of being, and every circumstance, self-inherent,
or adventitious, that attended her existence. All seemed to her sick
fancy so constructed as to ensure disgrace, desertion, and contempt. She
lay down each night feeling as if she could never endure to raise her
head on the morrow.

The unkindness and cruelty of her lover's conduct next presented
themselves to her contemplation. She had suffered much during the past
years, more than she had ever acknowledged, even to herself; she had
suffered of regret and sorrow, while she brooded over her solitary
position, and the privation of every object on whom she might bestow
affection. She had had nothing to hope. Saville had changed all this; he
had banished her cares, and implanted hope in her heart. Now again his
voice recalled the evils, his hand crushed the new-born expectation of
happiness. He was the cause of every ill; and the adversity which she
had endured proudly and with fortitude while it seemed the work of fate,
grew more bitter and heavy when she felt that it arose through the
agency of one, whose kind affection and guardianship she had fondly
believed would hereafter prove a blessing sent as from Heaven itself, be
to the star of her life.

This fit passed off; with struggles and relapses she wore down the first
gush of sorrow, and her disposition again assumed force over her. She
had found it difficult to persuade herself, in spite of facts, that she
was not loved; but it was easy, once convinced of the infidelity of her
lover, to regard him with indifference. She now regretted lost
happiness--but Saville was no longer regretted. She wept over the
vanished forms of delight, lately so dear to her; but she remembered
that he who had called them into life had driven them away; and she
smiled in proud scorn of his fleeting and unworthy passion. It was not
to this love that she had made so tender and lavish a return. She had
loved his constancy, his devotion, his generous solicitude for her
welfare--for the happiness which she bestowed on him, and for the
sympathy that so dearly united them. These were fled; and it were vain
to consecrate herself to an empty and deformed mockery of so beautiful a
truth.

Then she tried to hate him--to despise and to lessen him in her own
estimation. The attempt recoiled on herself. The recollection of his
worth stole across her memory, to frustrate her vain endeavours: his
voice haunted--his expressive eyes beamed on her. It were better to
forget. Indifference was her only refuge, and to attain this she must
wholly banish his image from her mind. Cornelia was possessed of
wonderful firmness of purpose. It had carried her on so long unharmed,
and now that danger was at hand, it served effectually to defend her.
She rose calm and free, above unmerited disaster. She grew proud of the
power she found that she possessed of conquering the most tyrannical of
passions. Peace entered her soul, and she hailed it as a blessing.

The clause in her husband's will which deprived her of the guardianship
of her daughter had been forgotten during this crisis. Before, under the
supposition that she should marry, she had deferred taking any step to
claim her. The idea of a struggle to be made, unassisted, unadvised, and
unshielded, was terrible. She had not courage to encounter all the
annoyances that might ensue. To get rid for a time of the necessity of
action and reflection, she went abroad. She changed the scene--she
travelled from place to place. She gave herself up in the solitude of
continental journies to the whole force of contending passions; now
overcome by despair, and again repressing regret, asserting to herself
the lofty pride of her nature.

By degrees she recovered a healthier tone of mind--a distant and faint,
yet genuine sense of duty dawned upon her; and she began to think on
what her future existence was to depend, and how she could best secure
some portion of happiness. Her heart once again warmed towards the image
of her daughter--and she felt that in watching the development of her
mind, and leading her to love and depend on her, a new interest and real
pleasure might spring up in life. She reproached herself for having so
long, by silence and passive submission, given scope to the belief that
she was willing to be a party against herself, in the injustice of Lodore;
and she returned to England with the intention of instantly enforcing her
rights over her child, and taking to her bosom and to her fondest care
the little being, whose affection and gratitude was to paint her future
life with smiles.

She called to mind Lady Santerre's worldly maxims, and her own
experience. She knew that the first step to success is the appearance of
prosperity and power. To command the good wishes and aid of her friends
she must appear independent of them. She was earnest therefore to hide
the wounds her heart had received, and the real loathing with which she
regarded all things. She arrayed herself in smiles, and banished, far
below into the invisible recesses of her bosom, the contempt and disgust
with which she viewed the scene around her.

She returned to England. She appeared at the height of the season, in
the midst of society, as beautiful, as charming, as happy in look and
manner, as in her days of light-hearted enjoyment. She paused yet a
moment longer, to reflect on what step she had better take on first
enforcing her claim; but her mind was full of its intention, and set
upon the fulfilment.

At this time, but a few days after her arrival in London, she went to
the opera. She heard the name of Fitzhenry called in the lobby--she saw
and recognized Mrs. Elizabeth--the venerable sister Bessy, so little
altered, that time might be said to have touched, but not trenched her
homely kindly face. With her, in attendance on her, she beheld Horatio
Saville's favourite cousin--the gay and fashionable Edward Villiers. It
was strange; her curiosity was strongly excited. It had not long to
languish: the next morning Villiers called, and was readily admitted.




CHAPTER V


And as good lost is seld or never found.

SHAKSPEARE.


Lady Lodore and Villiers met for the first time since Horatio Saville's
marriage. Neither were exactly aware of what the other knew or thought.
Cornelia was ignorant how far her attachment to his cousin was known to
him; whether he shared the general belief in her worldly coquetry, or
what part he might have had in occasioning their unhappy separation. She
could not indeed see him without emotion. He had been Lodore's second,
and received the last dying breath of him who had, in her brightest
youth, selected her from the world, to share his fortunes. Those days
were long past; yet as she grew older, disappointed, and devoid of
pleasurable interest in the present, she often turned her thoughts
backward, and wondered at the part she had acted.

Similar feelings were in Edward's mind. He was prejudiced against her in
every way. He despised her worldly calculations, as reported to him, and
rejoiced in their failure. He believed these reports, and despised her;
yet he could not see her without being moved at once with admiration and
pity. The moon-lit hill, and tragic scene, in which he had played his
part, came vividly before his eyes. He had been struck by the nobleness
of Lodore's appearance--the sensibility that sat on his countenance--his
gentle, yet dignified manners. Ethel's idolatry of her father had
confirmed the favourable prepossession. He could not help
compassionating Cornelia for the loss of her husband, forgetting, for
the moment, their separation. Then again recurred to him the eloquent
appeals of Saville; his eulogiums; his fervent, reverential affection.
She had lost him also. Could she hold up her head after such miserable
events? The evidence of the senses, and the ideas of our own minds, are
more forcibly present, than any notion we can form of the feelings of
others. In spite, therefore, of his belief in her heartlessness,
Villiers had pictured Cornelia attired in dismal weeds, the victim of
grief. He saw her, beaming in beauty, at the opera;--he now beheld her,
radiant in sweet smiles, in her own home. Nothing touched--nothing
harmed her; and the glossy surface, he doubted not, imaged well the
insensible, unimpressive soul within.

Lady Lodore would have despised herself for ever had she betrayed the
tremor that shook her frame when Villiers entered. Her pride of sex was in
arms to enable her to convince him, that no regret, no pining, shadowed her
days. The reality was abhorrent, and should never be confessed. Thus
then they met--each with a whole epic of woe and death alive in their
memory; but both wearing the outward appearance of frivolity and
thoughtlessness. He saw her as lovely as ever, and as kind. Her softest
and sweetest welcome was extended to him. It was this frequent show of
frank cordiality which gained her "golden opinions" from the many. Her
haughtiness was all of the mind;--a desire to please, and constant
association with others, had smoothed the surface, and painted it in the
colours most agreeable to every eye.

They addressed each other as if they had met but the day before. At
first, a few questions and answers passed,--as to where she had been on
the continent, how she liked Baden, &c.;--and then Lady Lodore
said--"Although I have not seen her for several years, I instantly
recognized a relative of mine with you yesterday evening. Does Miss
Fitzhenry make any stay in town?"

The idea of Ethel was uppermost in Villiers's mind, and struck by the
manner in which the woman of fashion spoke of her daughter, he replied,
"During the season, I believe; I scarcely know. Miss Fitzhenry came up
for her health; that consideration, I suppose, will regulate her
movements."

"She looked very well last night--perhaps she intends to remain till she
gets ill, and country air is ordered?" observed Lady Lodore.

"That were nothing new at least," replied Villiers, trying to hide the
disgust he felt at her mode of speaking; "the young and blooming too
often protract their first season, till the roses are exchanged for
lilies."

"If Miss Fitzhenry's roses still bloom," said the lady, "they must be
perennial ones; they have surely grown more fit for a herbal than a
vase."

Villiers now perceived his mistake, and replied, "You are speaking of
Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry, as the good lady styles herself--I spoke
of--her niece--"

"Has Ethel been ill?" Lady Lodore's hurried question, and the
use of the christian name, as most familiar to her thoughts, brought
home to Villiers's heart the feeling of their near relationship. There
was something more than grating; it was deeply painful to speak to a
mother of a child who had been torn from her--who did not know--who had
even been taught to hate her. He wished himself a hundred miles off, but
there was no help, he must reply. "You might have seen last night that
she is perfectly recovered."

Lady Lodore's imagination refused to image her child in the tall, elegant,
full-formed girl she had seen, and she said, "Was Ethel with you? I did
not see her--probably she went home before the opera was over, and I
only perceived your party in the crush-room--you appear already
intimate."

"It is impossible to see Miss Fitzhenry and not to wish to be intimate,"
replied Villiers with his usual frankness. "I, at least, cannot help
being deeply interested in every thing that relates to her."

"You are very good to take concern in my little girl. I should have
imagined that you were too young yourself to like children."

"Children!" repeated Villiers, much amazed; "Miss Fitzhenry!--she is not
a child."

Lady Lodore scarcely heard him; a sudden pang had shot across her heart, to
think how strangers--how every one might draw near her daughter, and be
interested for her, while she could not, without making herself the tale
of the town, the subject, through the medium of news-papers, for every
gossip's tea-table in England--where her sentiments would be scanned,
and her conduct criticized--and this through the revengeful feelings of
her husband, prolonged beyond the grave. Tears had been gathering in her
eyes during the last moments; she turned her head to hide them, and a
quick shower fell on her silken dress. Quite ashamed of this
self-betrayal, she exerted herself to overcome her emotion. Villiers
felt awkwardly situated; his first impulse had been to rise to take her
hand, to soothe her; but before he could do more than the first of these
acts, as Lady Lodore fancied for the purpose of taking his leave, she
said, "It is foolish to feel as I do; yet perhaps more foolish to
attempt to conceal from one, as well acquainted as you are with every
thing, that I do feel pained at the unnatural separation between me and
Ethel, especially when I think of the publicity I must incur by
asserting a mother's claims. I am ashamed of intruding this subject on
you; but she is no longer the baby cherub I could cradle in my arms, and
you have seen her lately, and can tell me whether she has been well
brought up--whether she seems tractable--if she promises to be pretty?"

"Did you not think her lovely?" cried Villiers with animation; "you saw
her last night, taking my arm."

"Ethel!" cried the lady. "Could that be Ethel? True, she is now
sixteen--I had indeed forgot"--her cheeks became suffused with a deep
blush as she remembered all the solicisms she had been committing. "She
is sixteen," she continued, "and a woman--while I fancied a little girl
in a white frock and blue sash: this alters every thing. We have been
indeed divided, and must now remain so for evermore. I will not injure
her, at her age, by making her the public talk--besides, many, many
other considerations would render me fearful of making myself
responsible for her future destiny."

"At least," said Villiers, "she ought to wait on you."

"That were beyond Lord Lodore's bond," said the lady; "and why should she
wait on me? Were she impelled by affection, it were well. But this is
talking very simply--we could only be acquaintance, and I would rather be
nothing. I confess, that I repined bitterly, that I was not permitted to
have my little girl, as I termed her, for my plaything and
companion--but my ideas are now changed: a dear little tractable child
would have been delightful--but she is a woman, with a will of her
own--prejudiced against me--brought up in that vulgar America, with all
kinds of strange notions and ways. Lord Lodore was quite right, I
believe--he fashioned her for himself and--Bessy. The worst thing that
can happen to a girl, is to have her prejudices and principles unhinged;
no new ones can flourish like those that have grown with her growth; and
mine, I fear, would differ greatly from those in which she has been
educated. A few years hence, she may feel the want of a friend, who
understands the world, and who could guide her prudently through its
intricacies; then she shall find that friend in me. Now, I feel
convinced that I should do more harm than good."

A loud knock at the street door interrupted the conversation. "One thing
only I cannot endure," said the lady hastily, "to present a domestic
tragedy or farce to the Opera House--we must not meet in public. I shall
shut up my house and return to Paris."

Mere written words express little. Lady Lodore's expressions were nothing;
but her countenance denoted a change of feeling, a violence of emotion, of
which Villiers hardly believed her capable; but before he could reply,
the servant threw open the door, and her brow immediately clearing,
serenity descended on her face. With her blandest smile she extended her
hand to her new visitor. Villiers was too much discomposed to imitate
her, so with a silent salutation he departed, and cantered round the
park to collect his thoughts before he called in Seymour-street.

The ladies there were not less agitated than Lady Lodore, and displayed
their feelings with the artlessness of recluses. The first words that Mrs.
Elizabeth had addressed to her niece, at the breakfast table, were an
awkwardly expressed intimation, that she meant instantly to return to
Longfield. Ethel looked up with a face of alarm: her aunt continued; "I
do not want to speak ill of Lady Lodore, my dear--God forgive her--that
is all I can say. What your dear father thought of her, his last will
testifies. I suppose you do not mean to disobey him."

"His slightest word was ever a law with me," said Ethel; "and now that
he is gone, I would observe his injunctions more religiously than ever.
But--"

"Then, my dear, there is but one thing to be done: Lady Lodore will
assuredly force herself upon us, meet us at every turn, oblige you to pay
her your duty; nor could you avoid it. No, my dear Ethel, there is but one
escape--your health, thank God, is restored, and Longfield is now in all
its beauty; we will return to-morrow."

Ethel did not reply; she looked very disconsolate--she did not know what
to say; at last, "Mr. Villiers will think it so odd," dropped from her
lips.

"Mr. Villiers is nothing to us, my dear," said aunt Bessy--"not the most
distant relation; he is an agreeable, good-hearted young gentleman--but
there are so many in the world."

Ethel left her breakfast untasted and went out of the room: she felt
that she could no longer restrain her tears. "My father!" she exclaimed,
while a passionate burst of weeping choked her utterance, "my only
friend! why, why did you leave me? Why, most cruel, desert your poor
orphan child? Gracious God! to what am I reserved! I must not see my
mother--a name so dear, so sweet, is for me a curse and a misery! O my
father, why did you desert me!"

Her calm reflections were not less bitter; she did not suffer her
thoughts to wander to Villiers, or rather the loss of her father was
still so much the first grief of her heart, that on any new sorrow, it
was to this she recurred with agony. The form of her youthful mother
also flitted before her; and she asked herself, "Can she be so wicked?"
Lord Lodore had never uttered her name; it was not until his death had put
the fatal seal on all things, that she heard a garbled exaggerated
statement from her aunt, over whose benevolent features a kind of sacred
horror mantled, whenever she was mentioned. The will of Lord Lodore, and
the stern injunction it contained, that the mother and daughter should
never meet, satisfied Ethel of the truth of all that her aunt said; so that
educated to obedience and deep reverence for the only parent she had
ever known, she recoiled with terror from transgressing his commands,
and holding communication with the cause of all his ills. Still it was
hard, and very, very sad; nor did she cease from lamenting her fate,
till Villiers's horse was heard in the street, and his knock at the
door; then she tried to compose herself. "He will surely come to us at
Longfield," she thought; "Longfield will be so very stupid after
London."

After London! Poor Ethel! she had lived in London as in a desert; but
lately it had appeared to her a city of bliss, and all places else the
abode of gloom and melancholy. Villiers was shocked at the appearance of
sorrow which shadowed her face; and, for a moment, thought that the
rencounter with her mother was the sole occasion of the tears, whose
traces he plainly discerned. His address was full of sympathetic
kindness;--but when she said, "We return to-morrow to Essex--will you
come to see us at Longfield?"--his soothing tones were exchanged for
those of surprise and vexation.

"Longfield!--impossible! Why?"

"My aunt has determined on it. She thinks me recovered; and so, indeed,
I am."

"But are you to be entombed at Longfield, except when dying? If so, do,
pray, be ill again directly! But this must not be. Dear Mrs. Fitzhenry,"
he continued, as she came in, "I will not hear of your going to
Longfield. Look; the very idea has already thrown Miss Fitzhenry into a
consumption;--you will kill her. Indeed you must not think of it."

"We shall all die, if we stay in town," said Mrs. Elizabeth, with
perplexity at her niece's evident suffering.

"Then why stay in town?" asked Villiers.

"You just now said, that we ought not to return to Longfield," answered
the lady; "and I am sure if Ethel is to look so ill and wretched, I
don't know what I am to do."

"But there are many places in the world besides either London or
Longfield. You were charmed with Richmond the other day: there are
plenty of houses to be had there; nothing can be prettier or more
quiet."

"Well, I don't know," said Aunt Bessy, "I never thought of that, to be
sure; and I have business which makes our going to Longfield very
inconvenient. I expect Mr. Humphries, our solicitor, next week; and I
have not seen him yet. You really think, Mr. Villiers, that we could get
a house to suit us at Richmond?"

"Let us drive there to-day," said Villiers; "we can dine at the Star and
Garter. You can go in the britzska--I on horseback. The days are long:
we can see every thing; and take your house at once."

This plan sounded very romantic and wild to the sober spinster; but
Ethel's face, lighted up with vivid pleasure, said more in its favour,
than what the good lady called prudence could allege against it. "Silly
people you women are," said Villiers: "you can do nothing by yourselves:
and are always running against posts, unless guided by others. This will
make every thing easy--dispel every difficulty." His thoughts recurred
to Lady Lodore, and her intended journey to Paris, as he said this: and
again they flew to a charming little villa on the river's side, whither he
could ride every day, and find Ethel among her flowers, alone and happy.

The excursion of this morning was prosperous. The day was warm yet
fresh; and as they quitted town, and got surrounded by fields, and
hedges, and trees, nature reassumed her rights, and awakened transport
in Ethel's heart. The boyish spirits of Villiers communicated themselves
to her; and Mrs. Elizabeth smiled, also, with the most exquisite
complacency. A few inquiries conducted them to a pretty rural box,
surrounded by a small, but well laid-out shrubbery; and this they
engaged. The dinner at the inn, the twilight walk in its garden;--the
fair prospect of the rich and cultivated country, with its silvery,
meandering river at their feet; and the aspect of the cloudless heavens,
where one or two stars silently struggled into sight amidst the pathless
wastes of sky, were objects most beautiful to look on, and prodigal of
the sweetest emotions. The wide, dark lake, the endless forests, and
distant mountains, of the Illinois, were not here; but night bestowed
that appearance of solitude, which habit rendered dear to Ethel; and
imagination could transform wooded parks and well-trimmed meadows into
bowery seclusions, sacred from the foot of man, and fresh fields,
untouched by his hand.

A few days found Ethel and her aunt installed at their little villa, and
delighted to be away from London. Education made loneliness congenial to
both: they might seek transient amusements in towns, or visit them for
business; but happiness, the agreeable tenor of unvaried daily life, was
to be found in the quiet of the country only;--and Richmond was the
country to them; for, cut off from all habits of intercourse with their
species, they had but to find trees and meadows near them, at once to
feel transported, from the thick of human life, into the most noiseless
solitude.

Ethel was very happy. She rose in the morning with a glad and grateful
heart, and gazed from her chamber window, watching the early sunbeams as
they crept over the various parts of the landscape, visiting with light
and warmth each open field or embowered nook. Her bosom overflowed with
the kindest feelings, and her charmed senses answered the tremulous
beating of her pure heart, bidding it enjoy. How beautiful did earth
appear to her! There was a delight and a sympathy in the very action of
the shadows, as they pranked the sunshiny ground with their dark and
fluctuating forms. The leafy boughs of the tall trees waved gracefully,
and each wind of heaven wafted a thousand sweets. A magic spell of
beauty and bliss held in one bright chain the whole harmonious universe;
and the soul of the enchantment was love--simple, girlish,
unacknowledged love;--the love of the young, feminine heart, which feels
itself placed, all bleakly and dangerously, in a world, scarce formed to
be its home, and which plumes itself with Love to fly to the covert and
natural shelter of another's protecting care.

Ethel did not know--did not fancy--that she was in love; nor did any of
the throes of passion disturb the serenity of her mind. She only felt
that she was very, very happy; and that Villiers was the kindest of
human beings. She did not give herself up to idleness and reverie. The
first law of her education had been to be constantly employed. Her
studies were various: they, perhaps, did not sufficiently tend to
invigorate her understanding, but they sufficed to prevent every
incursion of listlessness. Meanwhile, during each, the thought of
Villiers strayed through her mind, like a heavenly visitant, to gild all
things with sunny delight. Some time, during the day, he was nearly sure
to come; or, at least, she was certain of seeing him on the morrow; and
when he came, their boatings and their rides were prolonged; while each
moment added to the strength of the ties that bound her to him. She
relied on his friendship; and his society was as necessary to her life,
as the air she breathed. She so implicitly trusted to his truth, that
she was unaware that she trusted at all--never making a doubt about it.
That chance, or time, should injure or break off the tie, was a
possibility that never suggested itself to her mind. As the silver
Thames traversed in silence and beauty the landscape at her feet, so did
love flow through her soul in one even and unruffled stream--the great
law and emperor of her thoughts; yet more felt from its influence, than
from any direct exertion of its power. It was the result and the type of
her sensibility, of her constancy, of the gentle, yet lively sympathy,
it was her nature to bestow, with guileless confidence. Those around her
might be ignorant that her soul was imbued with it, because, being a
part of her soul, there was small outward demonstration. None, indeed,
near her thought any thing about it: Aunt Bessy was a tyro in such
matters; and Villiers--he had resolved, when he perceived love on her
side, to retreat for ever: till then he might enjoy the dear delight
that her society afforded him.




CHAPTER VI


Alas! he knows
The laws of Spain appoint me for his heir;
That all must come to me, if I outlive him,
Which sure I must do, by the course of nature.

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


Edward Villiers was the only child of a man of considerable fortune, who
had early in life become a widower. From the period of this event,
Colonel Villiers (for his youth had been passed in the army, where he
obtained promotion) had led the careless life of a single man. His son's
home was at Maristow Castle, when not at school; and the father seldom
remembered him except as an incumbrance; for his estate was strictly
entailed, so that he could only consider himself possessed of a life
interest in a property, which would devolve, without restriction, on his
more fortunate son.

Edward was brought up in all the magnificence of his uncle's lordly
abode. Luxury and profusion were the elements of the air he breathed. To
be without any desired object that could be purchased, appeared baseness
and lowest penury. He, also, was considered the favoured one of fortune
in the family circle. The elder brother among the Savilles rose above,
but the younger fell infinitely below, the undoubted heir of eight
thousand a year, and one of the most delightful seats in England. He was
brought up to look upon himself as a rich man, and to act as such; and
meanwhile, until his father's death, he had nothing to depend on, except
any allowance he might make him.

Colonel Villiers was a man of fashion, addicted to all the extravagances
and even vices of the times. He set no bounds to his expenses. Gambling
consumed his nights, and his days were spent at horse-races, or any
other occupation that at once excited and impoverished him. His income
was as a drop of water in the mighty stream of his expenditure.
Involvement followed involvement, until he had not a shilling that he
could properly call his own.

Poor Edward heard of these things, but did not mark them. He indulged in
no blameworthy pursuits, nor spent more than beseemed a man in his rank
of life. The idea of debt was familiar to him: every one--even Lord
Maristow--was in debt, far beyond his power of immediate payment. He
followed the universal example, and suffered no inconvenience, while his
wants were obligingly supplied by the fashionable tradesmen. He regarded
the period of his coming of age as a time when he should become
disembarrassed, and enter upon life with ample means, and still more
brilliant prospects.

The day arrived. It was celebrated with splendour at Maristow Castle.
Colonel Villiers was abroad; but Lord Maristow wrote to him to remind
him of this event, which otherwise he might have forgotten. A kind
letter of congratulation was, in consequence, received from him by
Edward; to which was appended a postscript, saying, that on his return,
at the end of a few weeks, he would consult concerning some arrangements
he wished to make with regard to his future income.

His return was deferred; and Edward began to experience some of the
annoyances of debt. Still no real pain was associated with his feelings;
though he looked forward with eagerness to the hour of liberation.
Colonel Villiers came at last. He spoke largely of his intended
generosity, which was shown, meanwhile, by his persuading Edward to join
in a mortgage for the sake of raising an immediate sum. Edward scarcely
knew what he was about. He was delighted to be of service to his father;
and without thought or idea of having made a sacrifice, agreed to all
that was asked of him. He was promised an allowance of six hundred a
year.

The few years that had passed since then were full of painful experience
and bitter initiation. His light and airy spirit was slow to conceive
ill, or to resent wrong. When his annuity remained unpaid, he listened
to his father's excuses with implicit credence, and deplored his
poverty. One day, he received a note from him, written, as usual, in
haste and confusion, but breathing anxiety and regret on his account,
and promising to pay over to him the first money he could obtain. On the
evening of that day, Edward was led by a friend into the gambling room
of a celebrated club. The first man on whom his eyes fell, was his
father, who was risking and losing rouleaus and notes in abundance. At
one moment, while making over a large sum, he suddenly perceived his
son. He grew pale, and then a deep blush spread itself over his
countenance. Edward withdrew. His young heart was pierced to the core.
The consciousness of a father's falsehood and guilt acted on him as the
sudden intelligence of some fatal disaster would have done. He breathed
thick--the objects swam round him--he hurried into the streets--he
traversed them one after the other. It was not this scene alone--this
single act; the veil was withdrawn from a whole series of others
similar; and he became aware that his parent had stepped beyond the line
of mere extravagance; that he had lost honourable feeling; that lies
were common in his mouth; and every other--even his only child--was
sacrificed to his own selfish and bad passions.

Edward never again asked his father for money. The immediate result of
the meeting in the gambling-room, had been his receiving a portion of
what was due to him; but his annuity was always in arrear, and paid so
irregularly, that it became worse than nothing in his eyes; especially,
as the little that he received was immediately paid over to creditors,
and to defray the interest of borrowed money.

He never applied again to Colonel Villiers. He would have considered
himself guilty of a crime, had he forced his father to forge fresh
subterfuges, and to lie to his own son. Brought up in the midst of the
wealthy, he had early imbibed a horror of pecuniary obligation; and this
fastidiousness grew more sensitive and peremptory with each added day of
his life. Yet with all this, he had not learnt to set a right value upon
money; and he squandered whatever he obtained with thoughtless
profusion. He had no friend to whose counsel he could recur. Lord
Maristow railed against Colonel Villiers; and when he heard of Edward's
difficulties, offered to remonstrate and force his brother-in-law to
extricate him: but here ended his assistance, which was earnestly
rejected. Horatio's means were exceedingly limited; but on a word from
his cousin, he eagerly besought him to have recourse to his purse. To
avoid his kindness, and his uncle's interference, Edward became
reserved: he had recourse to Jews and money-lenders; and appeared at
ease, while he was involving himself in countless and still increasing
embarrassments.

Edward was naturally extravagant; or, to speak more correctly, his
education and position implanted and fostered habits of expense and
prodigality, while his careless disposition was unapt to calculate
consequences: his very attempts at economy frequently cost him more than
his most expensive whims. He was not, like his father, a gambler; nor
did he enter into any very reprehensible pleasures: but he had little to
spend, and was thoughtless and confiding; and being always in arrear,
was forced, in a certain way, to continue a system which perpetually led
him further into the maze, and rendered his return impossible. He had no
hope of becoming independent, except through his father's death: Colonel
Villiers, meanwhile, had no idea of dying. He was not fifty years of
age; and considering his own a better life than his son's, involuntarily
speculated on what he should do if he should chance to survive him. He
was a handsome and a fashionable man: he often meditated a second
marriage, if he could render it advantageous; and repined at his
inability to make settlements, which was an insuperable impediment to
his project. Edward's death would overcome this difficulty. Such were
the speculations of father and son; and the portion of filial and
paternal affection which their relative position but too usually
inspires.

Until he was twenty-one, Edward had never spent a thought upon his
scanty resources. Three years had past since then--three brief years,
which had a little taught him of what homely stuff the world is made;
yet care and even reflection had not yet disturbed his repose. Days,
months sped on, and nothing reminded him of his relative wealth or
poverty in a way to annoy him, till he knew Ethel. He had been
interested for her in America--he had seen her, young and lovely,
drowned in grief--sorrowing with the heart's first prodigal sorrow for
her adored father. He had left her, and thought of her no more--except,
as a passing reflection, that in the natural course of things, she was
now to become the pupil of Lady Lodore, and consequently, that her
unsophisticated feelings and affectionate heart would speedily be
tarnished and hardened under her influence. He anticipated meeting her
hereafter in ball-rooms and assemblies, changed into a flirting, giddy,
yet worldly-minded girl, intent upon a good establishment, and a
fashionable partner.

He encountered her under the sober and primitive guardianship of Mrs.
Fitzhenry, unchanged and unharmed. The same radiant innocence beamed
from her face; her sweet voice was still true and heart-reaching in its
tones; her manner mirrored the purity and lustre of a mind incapable of
guile, and adorned with every generous and gentle sentiment. He drew near
her with respect and admiration, and soon no other object showed fair in
his eyes except Ethel. She was the star of the world, and he felt happy
only when the light of her presence shone upon him. Her voice and smile
visited his dreams, and spoke peace and delight to his heart. She was to
him as a jewel (yet sweeter and lovelier than any gem) shut up in a
casket, of which he alone possessed the key--as a pearl, of whose
existence an Indian diver is aware beneath the waves of ocean, deep
buried from every other eye.

There was all in Ethel that could excite and keep alive imaginative and
tender love. In characterizing a race of women, a delightful writer has
described her individually. "She was in her nature a superior being. Her
majestic forehead, her dark, thoughtful eye, assured you that she had
communed with herself. She could bear to be left in solitude--yet what a
look was her's if animated by mirth or love! She was poetical, if not a
poet; and her imagination was high and chivalrous."[1] The elevated tone of
feeling fostered by her father, her worship of his virtues, and the
loneliness of her life in the Illinois, combined to render her
dissimilar to any girl Villiers had ever before known or admired. When
unobserved, he watched her countenance, and marked the varying tracery
of high thoughts and deep emotions pass over it; her dark eye looked out
from itself on vacancy, but read there a meaning only to be discerned by
vivid imagination. And then when that eye, so full of soul, turned on
him, and affection and pleasure at once animated and softened its
glances--when her sweet lips, so delicate in their shape, so balmy and
soft in their repose, were wreathed into a smile--he felt that his whole
being was penetrated with enthusiastic admiration, and that his nature
had bent to a law, from which it could never again be liberated.

That she should mingle with the world--enter into its contaminating
pursuits--be talked of in it with that spirit of depreciation and
impertinence, which is its essence, was odious to him, and he was
overjoyed to have her safe at Richmond--secure from Lady Lodore--shut up
apart from all things, except nature--her unsophisticated aunt, and his own
admiration--a bird of beauty, brooding in its own fair nest,
unendangered by the fowler. These were his feelings; but by degrees
other reflections forced themselves on him; and love which, when it has
knocked and been admitted, _will_ be a tyrant, obliged him to entertain
regrets and fears which agonized him. His hourly aspiration was to make
her his own. Would that dear heart open to receive into its recesses his
image, and thenceforward dedicate itself to him only? Might he become
her lover, guardian, husband--and they tread together the jungle of
life, aiding each other to thread its mazes, and to ward off every
danger that might impend over them.

Bitter worldly considerations came to mar the dainty colours of this
fair picture. He could not conceal from himself the poverty that must
attend him during his father's life. Lord Lodore's singular will reduced
Ethel's property to almost nothing: should he then ally her to his
scanty means and broken fortune? His resolution was made. He would not
deny himself the present pleasure of seeing her, to spare any future
pain in which he should be the only sufferer; but on the first token of
exclusive regard on her side, he would withdraw for ever.


[Footnote 1: Coleridge's "Six Months in the West Indies."]




CHAPTER VII


The world is too much with us.

WORDSWORTH.


Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry's morning task was to read the newspapers--the
only intercourse she held with the world, and all her knowledge of it,
was derived from these daily sheets. Ethel never looked at them--her
thoughts held no communion with the vulgar routine of life, and she was
too much occupied by her studies and reveries to spend any time upon
topics so uninteresting as the state of the nation, or the scandal of
the day.

One morning, while she was painting, her aunt observed, in her usual
tone of voice, scarce lifting her eyes from the paper, "Mr. Villiers did
not tell us this--he is going to be married; I wonder who to!"

"Married!" repeated Ethel.

"Yes, my dear, here it is. 'We hear from good authority that Mr.
Villiers, of Chiverton Park, is about to lead to the hymeneal altar a
young and lovely bride, the only child of a gentleman, said to be the
richest commoner in England.'--Who can it be?"

Ethel did not reply, and the elder lady went on to other parts of the
newspaper. The poor girl, on whom she had dealt all unaware this chance
mortal blow, put down her brush, and hurried into the shrubbery to
conceal her agitation. Why did she feel these sharp pangs? Why did a
bitter deluge of anguish overflow and seem to choke her breathing, and
torture her heart?--she could scarcely tell. "Married!--then I shall
never see him more!" And a passion of tears, not refreshing, but forced
out by agony, and causing her to feel as if her heart was bursting,
shook her delicate frame. At that moment the well-known sound, the
galloping of Villiers's horse up the lane, met her ear. "Does he come
here to tell us at last of his wedding-day?" The horse came on--it
stopped--the bell was rung. Little acts these, which she had watched
for, and listened to, for two months, with such placid and innocent
delight, now they seemed the notes of preparation for a scene of
despair. She wished to retreat to her own room to compose herself; but
it was too late; he was already in that through which she must pass--she
heard his voice speaking to her aunt. "Now is he telling her," she
thought. No idea of reproach, or of accusation of unkindness in him,
dawned on her heart. No word of love had passed between them--even yet
she was unaware that she loved herself; it was the instinctive result of
this despot sentiment, which exerted its sway over her, without her
being conscious of the cause of her sufferings.

The first words of Mrs. Fitzhenry had been to speak of the paragraph in
the newspaper, and to show it her visitor. Villiers read it, and
considered it curiously. He saw at once, that however blunderingly
worded, his father was its hero; and he wondered what foundation there
might be for the rumour. "Singular enough!" he said, carelessly, as he
put the paper down.

"You have kept your secret well," said Mrs. Elizabeth.

"My secret! I did not even know that I had one."

"I, at least, never heard that you were going to be married."

"I!--married! Where is Miss Fitzhenry?"

The concatenation of ideas presented by these words fell unremarked on
the blunt senses of the good lady, and she replied, "In the shrubbery, I
believe, or upstairs: she left me but a moment ago."

Villiers hastened to the garden and soon discerned the tearful girl, who
was bending down to pluck and arrange some flowers, so to hide her
disturbed countenance.

Could we, at the moment of trial, summon our reason and our foregone
resolves--could we put the impression of the present moment at a
distance, which, on the contrary, presses on us with a power as
omnipotent over our soul, as a pointed sword piercing the flesh over our
life, we might become all that we are not--angels or demigods, or any
other being that is not human. As it is, the current of the blood and
the texture of the brain are the machinery by which the soul acts, and
their mechanism is by no means tractable or easily worked; once put in
motion, we can seldom controul their operations; but our serener
feelings are whirled into the vortex they create. Thus Edward Villiers
had a thousand times in his reveries thought over the possibility of a
scene occurring, such as the one he was called upon to act in now--and
had planned a line of conduct, but, like mist before the wind, this
gossamer of the mind was swept away by an immediate appeal to his heart
through his outward sensations. There stood before him, in all her
loveliness, the creature whose image had lived with him by day and by
night, for several long months; and the gaze of her soft tearful eyes,
and the faultering tone of her voice, were the laws to which his sense
of prudence, of right, was immediately subjected.

A few confused sentences interchanged, revealed to him that she
participated in her aunt's mistake, and her simple question, "Why did
you conceal this from me?" spoke the guilelessness of her thoughts,
while the anguish which her countenance expressed, betrayed that the
concealment was not the only source of her grief.

This young pair were ignorant how dear they were to each other. Ethel's
affection was that generous giving away of a young heart which is
unaware of the value of the gift it makes--she had asked for and thought
of no return, though her feeling was the result of a reciprocal one on
his side; it was the instinctive love of the dawn of womanhood, subdued
and refined by her gentle nature and imaginative mind. Edward was more
alive to the nature of his own sentiments--but his knowledge stood him
in no stead to fortify him against the power of Ethel's tears. In a
moment they understood each other--one second sufficed to cause the
before impervious veil to fall at their feet: they had stept beyond this
common-place world, and stood beside each other in the new and
mysterious region of which Love is emperor.

"Dearest Ethel," said Villiers, "I have much to tell you. Do arrange
that we should ride together. I have very much to tell you. You shall
know every thing, and judge for us both, though you should condemn me."

She looked up in his face with innocent surprise; but no words could
destroy the sunshine that brightened her soul: to know that she was
loved sufficed then to fill her being to overflowing with happiness, so
that there was no room for a second emotion.

The lovers rode out together, and thus secured the tête-à-tête which
Villiers especially yearned for. Although she was country-bred, Mrs.
Fitzhenry was too timid to mount on horseback, yet she could not feel
fear for her niece who, under her father's guidance, sat her steed with
an ease and perfect command of the animal, which long habit rendered
second nature to her. As they rode on, considerably in advance of the
groom, they were at first silent--the deep sweet silence which is so
eloquent of emotion--till with an effort, slackening his pace, and
bringing his horse nearer, Villiers began. He spoke of debt, of
difficulties, of poverty--of his unconquerable aversion to the making
any demands on his father--fruitless demands, for he knew how involved
Colonel Villiers was, and how incapable even of paying the allowance he
nominally made his son. He declared his reluctance to drag Ethel into
the sea of cares and discomforts that he felt must surround his youth.
He besought her forgiveness for having loved her--for having linked her
heart to his. He could not willingly resign her, while he believed that
he, all unworthy, was of any worth in her eyes; but would she not
discard him for ever, now that she knew that he was a beggar? and that
all to which he could aspire, was an engagement to be fulfilled at some
far distant day--a day that might never come--when fortune should smile
on him. Ethel listened with exquisite complacency. Every word Villiers
spoke was fraught with tenderness; his eye beamed adoration and
sincerest love. Consciousness chained her tongue, and her faltering
voice refused to frame any echo to the busy instigations of her virgin
heart. Yet it seemed to her as if she must speak; as if she were called
upon to avow how light and trivial were all worldly considerations in
her eyes. With bashful confusion she at length said, "You cannot think
that I care for fortune--I was happy in the Illinois."

Her simplicity of feeling was at this moment infectious. It appeared the
excess of selfishness to think of any thing but love in a desart--while
she had no desire beyond. Indeed, in England or America, she lived in a
desart, as far as society was concerned, and felt not one of those
tenacious though cobweb-seeming ties, that held sway over Villiers. All
his explanations therefore went for nothing. They only felt that this
discourse concerning him had drawn them nearer to each other, and had
laid the first stone of an edifice of friendship, henceforth to be
raised beside the already established one of love. A sudden shower
forced them also to return home with speed, and so interrupted any
further discussion.

In the evening Villiers left them; and Ethel sought, as speedily as she
might, the solitude of her own chamber. She had no idea of hiding any
circumstance from Mrs. Fitzhenry; but confidence is, more than any other
thing, a matter of interchange, and cannot be bestowed unless the giver
is certain of its being received. They had too little sympathy of taste
or idea, and were too little in the habit of communicating their inmost
thoughts, to make Ethel recur to her aunt. Besides, young love is ever
cradled in mystery;--to reveal it to the vulgar eye, appears at once to
deprive it of its celestial loveliness, and to marry it to the clodlike
earth. But alone--alone--she could think over the past day--recall its
minutest incident; and as she imaged to herself the speaking fondness of
her lover's eyes, her own closed, and a thrilling sense of delight swept
through her frame. What a different world was this to what it had been
the day before! The whole creation was invested by a purer atmosphere,
balmy as paradise, which no disquieting thought could penetrate. She
called upon her father's spirit to approve her attachment; and when she
reflected that Edward's hand had supported his dying head--that to
Edward Villiers's care his latest words had intrusted her,--she felt as if
she were a legacy bequeathed to him, and that she fulfilled Lodore's last
behests in giving herself to him. So sweetly and fondly did her gentle
heart strive to make a duty of her wishes; and the idea of her father's
approbation set the seal of perfect satisfaction on her dream of bliss.

It was somewhat otherwise with Villiers. Things went on as before, and
he came nearly every day to Richmond; but while Ethel rested satisfied
with seeing him, and receiving slight, cherished tokens of his unabated
regard,--as his voice assumed a more familiar tone, and his attentions
became more affectionate;--while these were enough for Ethel, he thought
of the future, and saw it each day dressed in gloomier colours. In
Ethel's presence, indeed, he forgot all but her. He loved her fervently,
and beheld in her all that he most admired in woman: her clearness of
spirit, her singleness of heart, her unsuspicious and ingenuous
disposition, were irresistibly fascinating;--and why not spend their
lives thus in solitude?--his--their mutual fortune might afford
this:--why not for ever thus--the happy--the beloved?--his life might
pass like a dream of joy; and that paradise might be realized on earth,
the impossibility of which philosophers have demonstrated, and
worldlings scoffed at.

Thus he thought while in the same room with Ethel;--while on his evening
ride back to town, her form glided before him, and her voice sounded in
his ears, it seemed that where Ethel was, no one earthly bliss could be
wanting; where she was not, a void must exist, dark and dreary as a
starless night. But his progress onward took him out of the magic circle
her presence drew; a portion of his elevated feeling deserted him at
each step; it fell off, like the bark pealing from a tree, in successive
coats, till he was left with scarce a vestige of its brightness;--as the
hue and the scent deserts the flower, when deprived of light,--so, when
away from Ethel, her lover lost half the excellence which her presence
bestowed.

Edward Villiers was eminently sociable in his disposition. He had been
brought up in the thick of life, and knew not how to live apart from it.
His frank and cordial heart danced within his bosom, when he was among
those who sympathized with, and liked him. He was much courted in
society, and had many favourites: and how Ethel would like these, and be
liked by them, was a question he perpetually asked himself. He knew the
worldliness of many,--their defective moral feeling, and their narrow
views; but he believed that they were attached to him, and no man was
ever less a misanthrope than he. He wished, if married to Ethel, to see
her a favourite in his own circle; but he revolted from the idea of
presenting her, except under favourable auspices, surrounded by the
decorations of rank and wealth. To give up the world, the English world,
formed no portion of his picture of bliss; and to occupy a subordinate,
degraded, permitted place in it, was, to one initiated in its
supercilious and insolent assumptions, not to be endured.

The picture had also a darker side, which was too often turned towards
him. If he felt hesitation when he regarded its brighter aspect, as soon
as this was dimmed, the whole current of his feelings turned the other
way; and he called himself villain, for dreaming of allying Ethel, not
to poverty alone, but to its worst consequences and disgrace, in the
shape of debt. "I am a beggar," he thought; "one of many wants, and
unable to provide for any;--the most poverty-stricken of beggars, who
has pledged away even his liberty, were it claimed of him. I look
forward to the course of years with disgust. I cannot calculate the ills
that may occur, or with how tremendous a weight the impending ruin may
fall. I can bear it alone; but did I see _her_ humiliated, whom I would
gladly place on a throne,--by heavens! I could not endure life on such
terms! and a pistol, or some other dreadful means, would put an end to
an existence become intolerable."

As these thoughts fermented within him, he longed to pour them out
before Ethel; to unload his mind of its care, to express the sincere
affection that led him to her side, and yet urged him to exile himself
for ever. He rode over each day to Richmond, intent on such a design;
but as he proceeded, the fogs and clouds that thickened round his soul
grew lighter. At first his pace was regulated; as he drew nearer, he
pressed his horse's flank with impatient heel, and bounded forward. Each
turn in the road was a step nearer the sunshine. Now the bridge, the
open field, the winding lane, were passed; the walls of her abode, and
its embowered windows, presented themselves;--they met; and the glad
look that welcomed him drove far away every thought of banishment, and
dispelled at once every remnant of doubt and despondency.

This state of things might have gone on much longer,--already had it
been protracted for two months,--but for an accidental conversation
between Lady Lodore and Villiers. Since the morning after the opera, they
had scarcely seen each other. Edward's heart was too much occupied to
permit him to join in the throng of a ball-room; and they had no chance of
meeting, except in general society. One evening, at the opera, the lady
who accompanied Lady Lodore, asked a gentleman, who had just come into
their box, "What had become of Edward Villiers?--he was never to be
seen?"

"He is going to be married," was the reply: "he is in constant
attendance on the fair lady at Richmond."

"I had not heard of this," observed Lady Lodore, who, for Horatio's sake,
felt an interest for his favourite cousin.

"It is very little known. The _fiancée_ lives out of the world, and no
one can tell any thing about her. I did hear her name. Young Craycroft
has seen them riding together perpetually in Richmond Park and on
Wimbledon Common, he told me. Miss Fitzroy--no;--Miss Fitz-something it
is;--Fitzgeorge?--no;--Fitzhenry?--yes; Miss Fitzhenry is the name."

Cornelia reddened, and asked no more questions. She controlled her
agitation; and at first, indeed, she was scarcely aware how much she
felt: but while the whole house was listening to a favourite air, and
her thoughts had leisure to rally, they came on her painfully, and
involuntary tears filled her eyes. It was sad, indeed, to hear of her
child as of a stranger; and to be made to feel sensibly how wide the
gulf was that separated them. "My sweet girl--my own Ethel!--are you,
indeed, so lost to me?" As her heart breathed this ejaculation, she felt
the downy cheek of her babe close to her's, and its little fingers press
her bosom. A moment's recollection brought another image:--Ethel, grown
up to womanhood, educated in hatred of her, negligent and
unfilial;--this was not the little cherub whose loss she lamented. Let
her look round the crowd then about her; and among the fair girls she
saw, any one was as near her in affection and duty, as the child so
early torn from her, to be for ever estranged and lost.

The baleful part of Cornelia's character was roused by these
reflections; her pride, her selfwill, her spirit of resistance. "And for
this she has been taken from me," she thought, "to marry, while yet a
child, a ruined man--to be wedded to care and indigence. Thus would it
not have been had she been entrusted to me. O, how hereafter she may
regret the injuries of her mother, when she feels the effects of them in
her own adversity! It is not for me to prevent this ill-judged union.
The aunt and niece would see in my opposition a motive to hasten it:
wise as they fancy themselves--wise and good--what I, the reviled,
reprobated, they would therefore pursue with more eagerness. Be it
so--my day will yet come!"

A glance of triumph shot across her face as she indulged in this emotion
of revenge; the most deceitful and reprehensible of human
feelings--revenge against a child--how sad at best--how sure to bring
with it its recompense of bitterness of spirit and remorse! But
Cornelia's heart had been rudely crushed, and in the ruin of her best
affections, her mother had substituted noxious passions of many
kinds--pride chief of all.

While thus excited and indignant, she saw Edward Villiers. He came into
her box; the lady with her was totally unaware of what had been passing
in her thoughts, nor reverted to the name mentioned as having any
connexion with her. She asked Villiers if it were true that he was going
to be married? Lady heard the question; she turned on him her eyes full
of significant meaning, and with a smile of scorn answered for him, "O
yes, Mr. Villiers is going to be married. His bride is young, beautiful,
and portionless; but he has the tastes of a hermit--he means to emigrate
to America--his simple and inexpensive habits are admirably suited to
the wilderness."

This was said as if in jest, and answered in the same tone. The third in
the trio joined in, quite unaware of the secret meaning of the
conversation. Several bitter allusions were made by Lady Lodore, and the
truth of all she said sent her words home to Edward's heart. She drew, as
if playfully, a representation of highbred indigence, that made his blood
curdle. As if she could read his thoughts, she echoed their worst
suggestions, and unrolled the page of futurity, such as he had often
depicted it to himself, presenting in sketchy, yet forcible colours, a
picture from which his soul recoiled. He would have escaped, but there
was a fascination in the topic, and in the very bitterness of spirit
which she awakened. He rather encouraged her to proceed, while he
abhorred her for so doing, acknowledging the while the justice of all
she said. Lady Lodore was angry, and she felt pleasure in the pain she
inflicted; her wit became keener, her sarcasm more pointed, yet stopping
short with care of any thing that should betray her to their companion,
and avoiding, with inimitable tact, any expression that should convey to
one not in the secret, that she meant any thing more than raillery or
good-humoured quizzing, as it is called.

At length Villiers took his leave. "Were I," he said, "the unfortunate
man you represent me to be, you would have to answer for my life this
night. But re-assure yourself--it is all a dream. I have no thoughts of
marrying; and the fair girl, whose fate as my wife Lady Lodore so kindly
compassionates, is safe from every danger of becoming the victim of my
selfishness and poverty."

This was said laughing, yet an expressive intonation of voice conveyed
his full meaning to Cornelia. "I have done a good deed if I have
prevented this marriage," she thought; "yet a thankless one. After all,
he is a gentleman, and under sister Bessy's guardianship, poor Ethel
might fall into worse hands."

While Lady Lodore thus dismissed her anger and all thought of its cause,
Villiers felt more resentment than had ever before entered his kind
heart. The truths which the lady had spoken were unpalatable, and the
mode in which they were uttered was still more disagreeable. He hated
her for having discovered them, and for presenting them so vividly to
his sight. At one moment he resolved never to see Ethel more; while he
felt that he loved her with tenfold tenderness, and would have given
worlds to become the source of all happiness to her--wishing this the
more ardently, because her mother had pictured him as being the cause to
her of every ill.

Edward's nature was very impetuous, but perfectly generous. The tempest
of anger allayed, he considered all that Lady Lodore had said impartially;
and while he felt that she had only repeated what he had told himself a
thousand times, he resolved not to permit resentment to controul him,
and to turn him from the right path. He felt also, that he ought no
longer to delay acting on his good resolutions. His intercourse with
Miss Fitzhenry had begun to attract attention, and must therefore cease.
Once again he would ride over to Richmond--once again see her--say
farewell, and then stoically banish every pleasant dream--every
heart-enthralling hope--willingly sacrificing his dearest wishes at the
shrine of her welfare.




CHAPTER VIII


She to a window came, that opened west,
Towards which coast her love his way addrest,
There looking forth, she in her heart did find
Many vain fancies working her unrest,
And sent her winged thoughts more swift than wind
To bear unto her love the message of her mind.

THE FAERIE QUEEN.


Ethel, happy in her seclusion, was wholly unaware of her mother's
interference and its effects. She had not the remotest suspicion that it
would be considered as conducive to her welfare to banish the only
friend that she had in the world. In her solitary position, life was a
blank without Edward; and while she congratulated herself on her good
fortune in the concurrence of circumstances that had brought them
together, and, as she believed, established her happiness on the dearest
and most secure foundations, she was far from imagining that he was
perpetually revolving the necessity of bidding her adieu for ever. If
she had been told two years before, that all intercourse between her and
her father were to cease, it would scarcely have seemed more unnatural
or impossible, than that such a decree should be issued to divide her
from one to whom her young heart was entirely given. She relied on him
as the support of her life--her guide and protector--she loved him as
the giver of good to her--she almost worshipped him for the many
virtues, which he either really possessed, or with which her fondness
bounteously gifted him.

Meanwhile the unacute observations of Mrs. Fitzhenry began to be
awakened. She gave herself great credit for discovering that there was
something singular in the constant attendance of Edward, and yet, in
fact, she owed her illumination on this point to her man of law. Mr.
Humphries, whom she had seen on business the day before, finding how
regular a visitor Villiers was, and their only one, first elevated his
eyebrows and then relaxed into a smile, as he said, "I suppose I am soon
to wish Miss Fitzhenry joy." This same day Edward had ridden down to
them; a violent storm prevented his return to town; he slept at the inn
and breakfasted with the ladies in the morning. There was something
familiar and home-felt in his appearance at the breakfast-table, that
filled Ethel with delight. "Women," says the accomplished author of Paul
Clifford, "think that they must always love a man whom they have seen in
his nightcap." There is deep philosophy in this observation, and it was
a portion of that feeling which made Ethel feel so sweetly complacent,
when Villiers, unbidden, rang the bell, and gave his orders to the
servant, as if he had been at home.

Aunt Bessy started a little; and while the young people were strolling
in the shrubbery and renewing the flowers in the vases, she was
pondering on the impropriety of their position, and wondering how she
could break off an intimacy she had hitherto encouraged. But one way
presented itself to her plain imagination, the old resource, a return to
Longfield. With light heart and glad looks, Ethel bounded up stairs to
dress for dinner, and she was twining her ringlets round her taper
fingers before the glass, when her aunt entered with a look of serious
import. "My dear Ethel, I have something important to say to you."

Ethel stopped in her occupation and turned inquiring eyes on her aunt;
"My dear," continued Mrs. Fitzhenry, "we have been a long time away; if
you please, we will return to Longfield."

This time Ethel did not grow pale; she turned again to the mirror,
saying with a smile that lighted her whole countenance, "Dear aunt, that
is impossible--I would rather not."

No negative could have been more imposing on the good lady than this;
she did not know how to reply, how to urge her wish. "Dearest aunt,"
continued her niece, "you are losing time--dinner will be announced, and
you are not dressed. We will talk of Longfield to-morrow--we must not
keep Mr. Villiers waiting."

It was often the custom of Aunt Bessy, like the father of Hamlet, to
sleep after dinner, she did not betake herself to her orchard, but her
arm-chair, for a few minutes' gentle doze. Ethel and Villiers meanwhile
walked out, and, descending to the river side, they were enticed by the
beauty of the evening to go upon the water. Ethel was passionately fond
of every natural amusement; boating was a pleasure that she enjoyed
almost more than any other, and one with which she was seldom indulged;
for her spinster aunt had so many fears and objections, and considered
every event but sitting still in her drawing-room, or a quiet drive with
her old horses, as so fraught with danger and difficulty, that it
required an absolute battle ever to obtain her consent for her niece to
go on the river--she would have died before she could have entered a
boat herself, and, walking at the water's edge, she always insisted that
Ethel should keep close to the bank, while, by the repetition of
expressions of alarm and entreaties to return, she destroyed every
possibility of enjoyment.

The river sped swiftly on, calm and free. There is always life in a
stream, of which a lake is frequently deprived, when sleeping beneath a
windless sky. A river pursues for ever its course, accomplishing the
task its Creator has imposed, and its waters are for ever changing while
they seem the same. It was a balmy summer evening; the air seemed to
brood over the earth, warming and nourishing it. All nature reposed, and
yet not as a lifeless thing, but with the same enjoyment of rest as
gladdened the hearts of the two beings, who, with gratitude and love,
drank in the influence of this softest hour of day. The equal splash of
the oar, or its dripping when suspended, the clear reflection of tree
and lawn in the river, the very colour of the stream, stolen as it was
from heaven itself, the plash of the wings of the waterfowl who skimmed
the waves towards their rushy nests,--every sound and every appearance
was beautiful, harmonious, and soothing. Ethel's soul was at peace;
grateful to Heaven, and satisfied with every thing around her, a
tenderness beamed from her eyes, and was diffused over her attitude, and
attuned her voice, which acted as a spell to make Edward forget every
thing but herself.

They had both been silent for some time, a sweet silence more eloquent
than any words, when Ethel observed, "My aunt wishes to return to
Longfield."

Villiers started as if he had trodden upon a serpent, exclaiming, "To
Longfield! O yes! that were far best--when shall you go?"

"Why is it best? Why should we go?" asked Ethel with surprise.

"Because," replied Villiers impetuously, "it had been better that you
had never left it--that we had never met! It is not thus that I can
fulfil my promise to your father to guard and be kind to his child. I am
practising on your ignorance, taking advantage of your loneliness, and
doing you an injury, for which I should call any other a villain, were
he guilty."

It was the very delight that Edward had been a moment before enjoying,
the very beauty and calmness of nature, and the serenity and kindness of
the sweet face turned towards him, which stirred such bitterness;
checking himself, however, he continued after a pause, in a more
subsided tone.

"Are there any words by which I can lay bare my heart to you,
Ethel?--None! To speak of my true and entire attachment, is almost an
insult; and to tell you, that I tear myself from you for your own sake,
sounds like impertinence. Yet all this is true; and it is the reverence
that I have for your excellence, the idolatry which your singleness of
heart and sincere nature inspires, which prompts me to speak the truth,
though that be different from the usual language of gallantry, or what
is called love.

"Will you hate me or pity me most, when I speak of my determination
never to see you more? You cannot guess how absolutely I am a ruined
man--how I am one of those despicable hangers-on of the rich and noble,
who cover my rags with mere gilding. I am a beggar--I have not a
shilling that I can call my own, and it is only by shifts and meannesses
that I can go on from day to day, while each one menaces me with a
prison or flight to a foreign country.

"I shall go--and you will regret me, Ethel, or you will despise me. It
were best of all that you forgot me. I am not worthy of you--no man
could be; that I have known you and loved you--and for your sake,
banished myself from you, will be the solitary ray of comfort that will
shed some faint glow over my chilled and darkened existence. Will you
say even now one word of comfort to me?"

Ethel looked up; the pure affectionateness of her heart prevented her
from feeling for herself, she thought only of her lover. "Would that I
could comfort you," she said. "You will do what you think right, and
that will be your best consolation. Do not speak of hatred, or contempt,
or indifference. I shall not change though we part for ever: how is it
possible that I should ever cease to feel regard for one who has ever
been kind, considerate, and generous to me? Go, if you think it right--I
am a foolish girl, and know nothing of the world; and I will not doubt
that you decide for the best."

Villiers took her hand and held it in his; his heart was penetrated by
her disinterested self-forgetfulness and confidence. He felt that he was
loved, and that he was about to part from her for ever. The pain and
pleasure of these thoughts mingled strangely--he had no words to express
them, he felt that it would be easier to die than to give her up.

Aunt Bessy, on the river's bank imploring their return, recalled them
from the fairy region to which their spirits had wandered. For one
moment they had been united in sentiment; one kindred emotion of perfect
affection had, as it were, married their souls one to the other; at the
alien sound of poor Bessy's voice the spell fled away on airy wings,
leaving them disenchanted. The rudder was turned, the boat reached the
shore, and unable to endure frivolous talk about any subject except the
one so near his heart, Villiers departed and rode back to town,
miserable yet most happy--despairing yet full of joy; to such a riddle,
love, which finds its completion in sympathy, and knows no desire
beyond, is the only solution.

The feelings of Ethel were even more unalloyed. She had no doubts about
the future, the present embraced the world. She did not attempt to
unravel the dreamy confusion of her thoughts, or to clear up the golden
mist that hung before, curtaining most gloriously the reality beyond.
Her step was buoyant, her eyes sparkling and joyous. Love and gladness
sat lightly on her bosom, and gratitude to Heaven for bestowing so deep
a sense of happiness was the only sentiment that mingled with these.
Villiers, on leaving them, had promised to return the next day; and on
the morrow she rose, animated with such a spirit as may be kindled
within the bosom of an Enchantress, when she pronounces the spell which
is to controul the movements of the planetary orbs. She was more than
queen of the world, for she was empress of Edward's heart, and ruling
there, she reigned over the course of destiny, and bent to her will the
conflicting elements of life.

He did not come. It was strange. Now hope, now fear, were interchanged
one for the other, till night and certain disappointment arrived. Yet it
was not much--the morrow's sun would light him on his way to her. To
cheat the lagging hours of the morrow, she occupied herself with her
painting and music, tasking herself to give so many hours to her
employments, thus to add speed to the dilatory walk of time. The long
day was passed in fruitless expectation--another and another succeeded.
Was he ill? What strange mutation in the course of nature had occurred
to occasion so inexplicable an absence?

A week went by, and even a second was nearly spent. She had not
anticipated this estrangement. Day by day she went over in her mind
their last conversation, and Edward's expressions gathered decision and
a gloomy reality as she pondered on them. The idea of an heroic
sacrifice on his part, and submission to his will on hers, at first
soothed her--but never to see him more, was an alternative that tasked
her fortitude too high; and while her heart felt all the tumults of
despair, she found herself asking what his love could be, that could
submit to lose her? Love in a cottage is the dream of many a high-born
girl, who is not allowed to dance with a younger brother at Almack's;
but a secluded, an obscure, an almost cottage life, was all that Ethel
had ever known, and all that she coveted. Villiers rejected this--not
for her sake, that could not be, but for the sake of a world, which he
called frivolous and vain, and yet to whose tyranny he bowed. To
disentwine the tangled skein of thought which was thus presented, was
her task by day and night. She awoke in the morning, and her first
thought was, "Will he come?" She retired at night, and sleep visited her
eyes, while she was asking herself, "Why has he not been?" During the
day, these questions, in every variety, forced her attention. To escape
from her aunt, to seek solitude, to listen to each sound that might be
his horse, and to feel her heart sicken at the still renewed
disappointment, became, in spite of herself, all her occupation: she
might bend over her drawing, or escape from her aunt's conversation to
the piano; but these were no longer employments, but rather means
adopted to deliver herself up more entirely to her reveries.

The third, the fourth week came, and the silence of death was between
Ethel and her friend. O but for one word, one look to break the spell!
Was she indeed never to see him more? Was all, all over?--was the
harmony their two hearts made, jarred into discord?--was she again the
orphan, alone in the world?--and was the fearless reliance she had
placed upon fate and Edward's fidelity, mere folly or insanity?--and was
desecration and forgetfulness to come over and to destroy the worship
she had so fondly cherished? Nothing had she to turn to--nothing to
console her. Her life became one thought, it twined round her soul like
a serpent, and compressed and crushed every other emotion with its
folds. "I could bear all," she thought, "were I permitted to see him
only once again."

She and Mrs. Fitzhenry were invited by Mrs. Humphries to dine with her.
They were asked to the awful ceremony of spending a long day, which, in
the innocence of her heart, Mrs. Fitzhenry fancied the most delightful
thing in the world. She thought that kindness and friendship demanded of
her that she should be in Montague-square by ten in the morning.
Notwithstanding every exertion, she could not get there till two, and
then, when luncheon was over, she wondered why the gap of time till
seven appeared so formidable. This was to be got over by a drive in
Hyde-park. Ethel had shown peculiar pleasure in the idea of visiting
London; she had looked bright and happy during their journey to town,
but anxiety and agitation clouded her face, at the thought of the park,
of the crisis about to arrive, at the doubt and hope she entertained of
finding Villiers there.

The park became crowded, but he was not in the drive; at length he
entered in the midst of a bevy of fair cousins, whom Ethel did not know
as such. He entered on horseback, flanked on either side by pretty
equestrians, looking as gay and light-hearted, as she would have done,
had she been one, the chosen one among his companions. Twice he passed.
The first time his head was averted--he saw nothing, she even did not
see his face: the next time, his eye caught the aspect of the well-known
chariot--he glanced eagerly at those it contained, kissed his hand, and
went on. Ethel's heart died within her. It was all over. She was the
neglected, the forgotten; but while she turned her face to the other
window of the carriage, so to hide its saddened expression from her
companion, a voice, the dearest, sweetest voice she had ever heard, the
soft harmonious voice, whose accents were more melodious than music,
asked, "Are you in town? have you left Richmond?" In spite of herself, a
smile mantled over her countenance, dimpling it into gladness, and she
turned to see the beloved speaker who had not deserted her--who was
there; she turned, but there was no answering glance of pleasure in the
face of Villiers--he looked grave, and bowed, as if in this act of
courtesy he fulfilled all of friendly interchange that was expected of
him, and rode off. He was gone--and seen no more.




CHAPTER IX


Sure, when the separation has been tried,
That we, who part in love, shall meet again.

WORDSWORTH.


This little event roused Ethel to the necessity of struggling with the
sentiment to which hitherto she had permitted unquestioned power. There
had been a kind of pleasure mingled with her pain, while she believed
that she suffered for her lover's sake, and in obedience to his will. To
love in solitude and absence, was, she well knew, the lot of many of her
sex, and all that is imaginative and tender lends poetry to the emotion.
But to love without return, her father had taught her was shame and
folly--a dangerous and undignified sentiment that leads many women into
acts of humiliation and misery. He spoke the more warmly on this
subject, because he desired to guard his daughter by every possible
means from a fate too common. He knew the sensibility and constancy of
her nature. He dreaded to think that these should be played upon, and
that her angelic sweetness should be sacrificed at the altar of hopeless
passion. That all the powers he might gift her with, all the fortitude
and all the pride that he strove to instil, might be insufficient to
prevent this one grand evil, he too well knew; but all that could should
be done, and his own high-souled Ethel should rise uninjured from the
toils of the snarer, the heartless game of the unfaithful lover.

She steeled her heart against every softer thought, she tasked herself
each day to devote her entire attention to some absorbing employment; to
languages and the composition of music, as occupations that would not
permit her thoughts to stray. She felt a pain deep-seated in her inmost
heart; but she refused to acknowledge it. When a thought, too sweet and
bitter, took perforce possession of the chambers of her brain, she drove
it out with stern and unshaken resolve. She pondered on the best means
to subdue every rebel idea. She rose with the sun, and passed much time
in the open air, that when night came, bodily fatigue might overpower
mental regrets. She conversed with her aunt again about her dear lost
father; that, by renewing images, so long the only ones dear to her,
every subsequent idea might be driven from the place it had usurped.
Always she was rewarded by the sense of doing right, often by really
mitigating the anguish which rose and went to rest with her, and
awakening her in the morning, stung her to renew her endeavours, while
it whispered too audibly, "I am here." She grew pale and thin, and her
eyes again resumed that lustre which spoke a quick and agitated life
within. Her endeavours, by being unremitting, gave too much intensity to
every feeling, and made her live each moment of her existence a
sensitive, conscious life, wearing out her frame, and threatening, while
it accelerated the pulses, to exhaust betimes the animal functions.

She felt this; and she roused herself to contend afresh with her own
heart. As a last resource she determined to quit Richmond. Her
struggles, and the energy called into action by her fortitude, gave a
tone of superiority to her mind, which her aunt felt and submitted to.
Now when a change of residence was determined upon, she at once
negatived the idea of returning to Longfield--yet whither else betake
themselves? Ethel no longer concealed from herself that she and the
worthy spinster were solitary wanderers on earth, cut off from human
intercourse. A bitter sense of desolation had crept over her from the
moment that she knew herself to be deserted by Villiers. All that was
bright in her position darkened into shadow. She shrunk into herself
when she reflected, that should the ground at her feet open and swallow
her, not one among her fellow-creatures would be sensible that the whole
universe of thought and feeling, which emanated from her breathing
spirit, as water from a living spring, was shrunk up and strangled in a
narrow, voiceless grave. A short time before she had regarded death
without terror, for her father had been its prey, and his image was
often shadowed forth in her fancy, beckoning her to join him. Now it had
become more difficult to die. Nature and love were wedded in her mind,
and it was a bitter pang for one so young to bid adieu to both for ever.
Turning her thoughts from Villiers, she would have been glad to discover
any link that might enchain her to the mass. She reverted to her mother.
Her inexperience, her youth, and the timidity of her disposition,
prevented her from making any endeavour to break through the wall of
unnatural separation raised between them. She could only lament. One sign,
one word from Lady Lodore, would have been balm to her poor heart, and
she would have met it with fervent gratitude. But she feared to offend.
She had no hope that any advance would have been met by other than a
disdainful repulse; and she shrunk from intruding herself on her
unwilling parent. She often wept to think that there was none near to
support and comfort her, and yet that at the distance of but a few miles
her mother lived--whose very name was the source of the dearest,
sweetest, and most cruel emotions. She thought, therefore, of her
surviving parent only to despair, and to shrink with terror from the
mere possibility of an accidental meeting.

She earnestly desired to leave England, which had treated her with but a
step-mother's welcome, and to travel away, she knew not whither. Yet
most she wished to go to Italy. Her father had often talked of taking
her to that country, and it was painted in her eyes with the hues of
paradise. She spoke of her desire to her aunt, who thought her mad, and
believed that it was as easy to adventure to the moon, as for two
solitary women to brave alps and earthquakes, banditti and volcanoes, a
savage people and an unknown land. Still, even while she trembled at the
mere notion, she felt that Ethel might lead her thither if she pleased.
It is one of the most beneficent dispensations of the Creator, that
there is nothing so attractive and attaching as affection. The smile of
an infant may command absolutely, because its source is in dependent
love, and the human heart for ever yearns for such demonstration from
another. What would this strange world be without that "touch of
nature?" It is to the immaterial universe, what light is to the visible
creation, scent to the flower, hue to the rainbow; hope, joy, succour,
and self-forgetfulness, where otherwise all would be swallowed up in
vacant and obscure egotism.

No one could approach Ethel without feeling that she possessed an
irresistible charm. The overflowing and trusting affectionateness of her
nature was a loadstone to draw all hearts. Each one felt, even without
knowing wherefore, that it was happiness to obey, to gratify her. Thus
while a journey to Italy filled Mrs. Elizabeth with alarm, a consent
hovered on her lips, because she felt that any risk was preferable to
disappointing a wish of her gentle niece.

And yet even then Ethel paused. She began to repent her desire of
leaving the country inhabited by her dearest friend. She felt that she
should have an uncongenial companion in her aunt--the child of the
wilderness and the good lady of Longfield, were like a living and dead
body in conjunction--the one inquiring, eager, enthusiastic even in her
contemplativeness, sensitively awake to every passing object; while the
other dozed her hours away, and fancied that pitfalls and wild beasts
menaced her, if she dared step one inch from the beaten way.

At this moment, while embarrassed by the very yielding to her desires,
and experiencing a lingering sad regret for all that she was about to
leave behind, Ethel received a letter from Villiers. Her heart beat, and
her fingers trembled, when first she saw, as now she held a paper, which
might be every thing, yet might be nothing to her; she opened it at
last, and forced herself to consider and understand its contents. It was
as follows:--


"DEAR MISS FITZHENRY,

"Will your aunt receive me with her wonted
kindness when I call to-morrow? I fear to have offended by an appearance
of neglect, while my heart has never been absent from Richmond. Plead my
cause, I entreat you. I leave it in your hands.

"Ever and ever yours.

"EDWARD VILLIERS."

_Grosvenor Square, Saturday._


"Dearest Ethel, have you guessed at my sufferings? Shall you hail with
half the joy that I do, a change which enables you to revoke the decree
of absence so galling at least to one of us? If indeed you have not
forgotten me, I shall be rewarded for the wretchedness of these last
weeks."


Ethel kissed the letter and placed it near her heart. A calm joy
diffused itself over her mind; and that she could indeed trust and
believe in him she loved, was the source of a grateful delight, more
medicinal than all the balmy winds of Italy and its promised pleasures.

When Villiers had last quitted Richmond, he had resolved not to expose
himself again to the influence of Ethel. It was necessary that they
should be divided--how far better that they should never meet again! He
was not worthy of her. Another, more fortunate, would replace him, if he
sacrificed his own selfish feelings, and determinately absented himself
from her. As if to confirm his view of their mutual interest, his elder
cousin, Mr. Saville, had just offered his hand to the daughter of a
wealthy Earl, and had been accepted. Villiers took refuge from his
anxious thoughts among his pretty cousins, sisters of the bridegroom,
and with them the discussion of estates, settlements, princely mansions,
and equipages, was the order of the day. Edward sickened to reflect how
opposite would be the prospect, if his marriage with Ethel were in
contemplation. It was not that a noble establishment would be exchanged
for a modest, humble dwelling--he loved with sufficient truth to feel
that happiness with Ethel transcended the wealth of the world. It was
the absolute penury, the debt, the care, that haunted him and made such
miserable contrast with the tens and hundreds of thousands that were the
subject of discussion on the present occasion. His resolution not to
entangle Ethel in this wilderness of ills, gained strength by every
chance word that fell from the lips of those around him; and the image,
before so vivid, of her home at Richmond, which he might at each hour
enter, of her dear face, which at any minute might again bless his
sight, faded into a far-off vision of paradise, from which he was
banished for ever.

For a time he persevered in his purpose, if not with ease, yet with less
of struggle than he himself anticipated. That he could at any hour break
the self-enacted law, and behold Ethel, enabled him day after day to
continue to obey it, and to submit to the decree of banishment he had
passed upon himself. He loved his pretty cousins, and their kindness and
friendship soothed him; he spent his days with them, and the familiar,
sisterly intercourse, hallowed by long association, and made tender by
the grace and sweetness of these good girls, compensated somewhat for
the absence of deeper interest. They talked of Horatio also, and that
was a more touching string than all. The almost worship, joined to pity
and fear for him, with which Edward regarded his cousin, made him cling
fondly to those so closely related to him, and who sympathized with, and
shared, his enthusiastic affection.

This state of half indifference did not last long. His meeting with
Ethel in Hyde Park operated an entire change. He had seen her face but a
moment--her dear face, animated with pleasure at beholding him, and
adorned with more than her usual loveliness. He hurried away, but the
image still pursued him. All at once the world around grew dark and
blank; at every instant his heart asked for Ethel. He thirsted for the
sweet delight of gazing on her soft lustrous eyes, touching her hand,
listening to her voice, whose tones were so familiar and beloved. He
avoided his cousins to hide his regrets; he sought solitude, to commune
with memory; and the intense desire kindled within him to return to her,
was all but irresistible. He had received a letter from Horace Saville
entreating him to join him at Naples; he had contemplated complying, as
a means of obtaining forgetfulness. Should he not, on the contrary, make
this visit with Ethel for his companion? It was a picture of happiness
most enticing; and then he recollected with a pang, that it was
impossible for him to quit England; that it was only by being on the
spot, that he obtained the supplies necessary for his existence. With
bitterness of spirit he recognized once again his state of beggary, and
the hopelessness that attended on all his wishes.

All at once he was surprised by a message from his father, through Lord
Maristow. He was told of Colonel Villiers's intended marriage with the
only daughter of a wealthy commoner, which yet could not be arranged
without the concurrence of Edward, or rather without sacrifices on his
part for the making of settlements. The entire payment of his debts, and
the promise of fifteen hundred a year for the future, were the bribes
offered to induce him to consent. Edward at once notified his
compliance. He saw the hour of freedom at hand, and the present was too
full of interest, too pregnant with misery or happiness, to allow the
injury done to his future prospects to weigh with him for a moment. Thus
he might purchase his union with Ethel--claim her for his own. With the
thought, a whole tide of tenderness and joy poured quick and warm into
his heart, and it seemed as if he had never loved so devotedly as now.
How false an illusion had blinded him! he fancied that he had banished
hope, while indeed his soul was wedded to her image, and the very
struggle to free himself, had served to make the thought of her more
peremptory and indelible.

With these thoughts, he again presented himself at Richmond. He asked
Mrs. Fitzhenry's consent to address her niece, and became the accepted
lover of Ethel. The meeting of their two young hearts in the security of
an avowed attachment, after so many hours wasted in despondency and
painful struggles, did not visit the fair girl with emotions of burning
transport: she felt it rather like a return to a natural state of
things, after unnatural deprivation. As if, a young nestling, she had
been driven from her mother's side, and was now restored to the dear
fosterage of her care. She delivered herself up to a calm reliance upon
the future, and saw in the interweaving of duty and affection, the
fulfilment of her destiny, and the confirmation of her earthly
happiness. They were to be joined never to part more! While each
breathed the breath of life, no power could sever them; health or
sickness, prosperity or adversity--these became mere words; her health
and her riches were garnered in his heart, and while she bestowed the
treasures of her affection upon him, could he be poor? It was not
therefore to be her odious part to crush the first and single attachment
of her soul--to tear at once the "painted veil of life," delivering
herself up to cheerless realities--to know that, to do right, she must
banish from her recollection those inward-spoken vows which she should
deem herself of a base inconstant disposition ever to forget. It was not
reserved for her to pass joyless years of solitude, reconciling herself
to the necessity of divorcing her dearest thoughts from their wedded
image. The serene and fair-showing home she coveted was open before
her--she might pass within its threshold, and listen to the closing of
the doors behind, as they shut out the world from her, with pure and
unalloyed delight.

Ethel was very young, yet in youth such feelings are warmer in our
hearts than in after years. We do not know then that we can ever change;
or that, snake-like, casting the skin of an old, care-worn habit, a new
one will come fresh and bright in seeming, as the one before had been,
at the hour of its birth. We fancy then, that if our present and first
hope is disappointed, our lives are a mere blank, not worth a "pin's
fee;" the singleness of our hearts has not been split into the million
hair-like differences, which, woven by time into one texture, clothes us
in prudence as with a garment. We are as if exposed naked to the action
of passions and events, and receive their influence with keen and
fearful sensitiveness. Ethel scarcely heard, and did not listen to nor
understand, the change of circumstances that brought Villiers back to
her--she only knew, that he was confirmed her own. Satisfied with this
delightful conclusion to her sufferings, she placed her destiny in his
hands, without fear or question.

Mrs. Elizabeth thought her niece very young to marry; but Villiers, who
had, while hesitating, done his best to hide his sweet Ethel away from
every inquisitive eye, now that she was to be his own, hastened to
introduce Lord Maristow (Lady Maristow had died two years before) to
her, and to bring her among his cousins, whom he regarded as sisters.
The change was complete and overwhelming to the fair recluses. Where
before they lived in perpetual tête-à-tête, or separated but to be
alone, they were now plunged into what appeared to them a crowd. Sophia,
Harriet, and Lucy Saville, were high-born, high-bred, and elegant girls,
accustomed to what they called the quiet of domestic life, amidst a
thousand relations and ten thousand acquaintances. No female relative
had stepped into their mother's place, and they were peculiarly
independent and high-spirited; they had always lived in what they called
the world, and knew nothing but what that world contained. Their manners
were easy, their tempers equable and affectionate. If their dispositions
were not all exactly alike, they had a family resemblance that drew them
habitually near each other. They received Ethel among their number with
cordiality, bestowing on her every attention which politeness and
kindness dictated. Yet Ethel felt somewhat as a wild antelope among tame
ones. Their language, the topics of their discourse, their very
occupations, were all new to her. She lent herself to their customs with
smiles and sweetness, but her eye brightened when Edward came, and she
often unconsciously retreated to his side as a shelter and a refuge.
Edward's avocations had been as worldly perhaps as those of his pretty
cousins; but a man is more thrown upon the reality of life, while girls
live altogether in a factitious state. He had travelled much, and seen
all sorts of people. Besides, between him and Ethel, there was that mute
language which will make those of opposite sexes intelligible to one
another, even when literally not understanding each other's dialect.
Villiers found no deficiency of intelligence or sympathy in Ethel, while
the fashionable girls to whom he had introduced her felt a little at a
loss how to entertain the stranger.

Lord Maristow and his family had been detained in town till after Mr.
Saville's marriage, and were now very eager to leave it. They remained
out of compliment to Edward, and looked forward impatiently to his
wedding as the event that would set them free. London was empty, the
shooting season had begun; yet still he was delayed by his father. He
wished to sign the necessary papers, and free himself from all business,
that he and his bride might immediately join Horatio at Naples. Yet
still Colonel Villiers's marriage was delayed; till at last he intimated
to his son, that it was postponed for the present, and begged that he
would not remain in England on his account.

Edward was somewhat staggered by this intelligence. Yet as the letter
that communicated it contained a considerable remittance, he quieted
himself. To give up Ethel now was a thought that did not for a moment
enter his mind; it was but the reflection of the difficulties that would
surround them, if his prospects failed, that for a few seconds clouded
his brow with care. But it was his nature usually to hope the best, and
to trust to fortune. He had never been so prudent as with regard to his
marriage with Ethel; but that was for her sake. This consideration could
not again enter; for, like her, he would, under the near hope of making
her his, have preferred the wilds of the Illinois, with her for his
wife, than the position of the richest English nobleman, deprived of
such a companion. His heart, delivered up to love, was complete in its
devotion and tenderness. He was already wedded to her in soul, and would
sooner have severed his right arm from his body, than voluntarily have
divided himself from this dearer part of himself. This "other half,"
towards whom he felt as if literally he had, to give her being,


"Lent
Out of his side to her, nearest his heart;
Substantial life, to have her by his side,
Henceforth an individual solace dear."


With these feelings, an early day was urged and named; and, drawing
near, Ethel was soon to become a bride. On first making his offer,
Villiers had written to Lady Lodore; and Mrs. Fitzhenry, much against her
will, by the advice of her solicitor, did the same. Lady Lodore was in
Scotland. No answer came. The promised day approached; but still she
preserved this silence: it became necessary to proceed without her
consent. Banns were published; and Ethel became the wife of Villiers on
the 25th of October. Lord Maristow hastened down to his Castle to kill
pheasants: while, on her part, Mrs. Fitzhenry took her solitary way to
Longfield, half consoled for separating from Ethel, by this return to
the habits of more than sixty years. In vain had London or Richmond
wooed her stay; in vain was she pressed to pay a visit to Maristow
Castle: to return to her home was a more enticing prospect. Her good old
heart danced within her when she first perceived the village steeple;
the chimneys of her own house made tears spring into her eyes; and when,
indeed, she found herself by the familiar hearth, in the accustomed
arm-chair, and her attentive housekeeper came to ask if she would not
take any thing after her journey, it seemed to her as if all the
delights of life were summed up in this welcome return to monotony and
silence.




CHAPTER X


Let me
Awake your love to my uncomforted brother.

OLD PLAY.


Meanwhile Villiers and his bride proceeded on their way to Naples. It
mattered little to Ethel whither they were going, or to whom. Edward was
all in all to her; and the vehicle that bore them along in their journey
was a complete and perfect world, containing all that her heart desired.
They avoided large towns, and every place where there was any chance of
meeting an acquaintance. They passed up the Rhine, and Ethel often
imaged forth, in her fancy, a dear home in a secluded nook; and longed
to remain there, cut off from the world, for ever. She had no thought
but for her husband, and gratitude to Heaven for the happiness showered
on her. Her soul might have been laid bare, each faculty examined, each
idea sifted, and one spirit, one sentiment, one love, would have been
found pervading and uniting them all. The heart of a man is seldom as
single and devoted as that of a woman. In the present instance, it was
natural that Edward should not be so absolutely given up to one thought
as was his bride. Ethel's affections had never been called forth except
by her father, and by him who was now her husband. When it has been
said, that she thought of heaven to hallow and bless her happiness, it
must be understood that the dead made a part of that heaven, to which
she turned her eyes with such sweet thankfulness. She was constant to
the first affection of her heart. She might be said to live perpetually
in thought beside her father's grave. Before she had wept and sorrowed
near it; now she placed the home of her happy married life close to the
sacred earth, and fancied that its mute inhabitant was the guardian
angel to watch over and preserve her.

Villiers had lived among many friends, and was warmly attached to
several. His cousin Horatio was dearer to him than any thing had ever
been, till he knew Ethel. Even now he revered him more, and felt a kind
of duteous attachment drawing him towards him. He wanted Horatio to see
and approve of Ethel:--not that he doubted what his opinion of her would
be; but the delight which his own adoration of her excellence imparted
to him would be doubled, when he saw it shared and confirmed by his
friend. Besides this, he was anxious to see Horace on his own account.
He wished to know whether he was happy in his marriage; whether Clorinda
were worthy of him; and if Lady Lodore were entirely forgotten. As they
advanced on their journey, his desire to see his cousin became more and
more present to his mind; and he talked of him to Ethel, and imparted to
her a portion of his fervent and affectionate feelings.

Entering Switzerland, they came into a world of snow. Here and there, on
the southern side of a mountain, a lawny upland might disclose itself in
summer verdure; and the brawling torrents, increased by the rains, were
not yet made silent by frost. Edward had visited these scenes before;
and he could act the guide to his enraptured Ethel, who remembered her
father's glowing descriptions; and while she gazed with breathless
admiration, saw his step among the hills, and thought that his eye had
rested on the wonders she now beheld. Soon the mountains, the
sky-seeking "palaces of nature," were passed, and they entered fair,
joyous Italy. At each step they left winter far behind. Ethel would
willingly have lingered in Florence and Rome; but once south of the
Appenines, Edward was eager to reach Naples; and the letters he got from
Saville spurred him on to yet greater speed.

Before leaving England, Lucy Saville had said to Ethel,--"You are now
taking our other comfort from us; and what we are to do without either
Horatio or Edward, I am unable to conjecture. We shall be like a house
without its props. Divided, they are not either of them half what they
were joined. Horace is so prudent, so wise, so considerate, so
sympathizing; Edward so active and so kind-hearted. In any difficulty,
we always asked Horace what we ought to do; and Edward did the thing
which he pointed out.

"Horatio's marriage was a sad blow to us all. You will bring Edward
back, and we shall be the happier for your being with him; but shall we
ever see our brother again?--or shall we only see him to lament the
change? Not that he can ever really alter; his heart, his understanding,
his goodness, are as firm as rock; but there is that about him which
makes him too much the slave of those he is in immediate contact with.
He abhors strife; the slightest disunion is mortal to him. He is not of
this world. Pure-minded as a woman, honourable as a knight of old, he is
more like a being we read of, and his match is not to be found upon
earth. Horatio never loved but once, and his attachment was unfortunate.
He loved Lady----" Here recollection dyed Miss Saville's cheeks with
crimson: she had forgotten that Lady Lodore was the mother of Ethel. After
a moment's hesitation she continued:--"I have no right to betray the
secrets of others. Horace was a discarded lover; and he was forced to
despise the lady whom he had imagined possessed of every excellence. For
the first time he was absorbed in what may be termed a selfish
sentiment. He could not bear to see any of us: he fled even from Edward,
and wandering away, we heard at last that he was at Naples, whither he
had gone quite unconscious of the spot of earth to which he was bending
his steps. The first letter we got from him was dated from that place.
His letter was to me; for I am his favourite sister; and God knows my
devoted affection, my worship of him, deserves this preference. You
shall read it; it is the most perfect specimen of enthusiastic and
heart-moving eloquence ever penned. He had been as in a trance, and
awoke again to life as he looked down from Pausilippo on the Bay of
Naples. The attachment to one earthly object, which preyed on his being,
was suddenly merged in one universal love and adoration. He saw that the
"creation was good;" he purged his heart at once of the black spot which
had blotted and marred its beauty; and opened his whole soul to pure,
elevated, heavenly love. I tamely quote his burning and transparent
expressions, through which you may discern, as in a glass, the glorious
excellence of his soul."

"But, alas! this state of holy excitement could not endure; something
human will still creep in to mingle with and sully our noblest
aspirations. Horatio was taken by an acquaintance to see a beautiful
girl at a convent; in a fatal moment an English lady said to him, 'Come,
and I will show you what perfect beauty is:' and those words decided my
poor brother's destiny. Of course I only know our new sister through his
letters. He told us that Clorinda was shut up in this convent through
the heartless vanity of her mother, who dreaded her as a rival, to wait
there till her parents should find some suitable match, which she must
instantly accept, or be doomed to seclusion for ever. In his younger
days Horace had said, 'I am in love with an idea, and therefore women
have no power over me.' But the time came when his heart was to be the
dupe of his imagination--so was it with his first love--so now, I fear,
did he deceive himself with regard to Clorinda. He declared indeed that
his love for her was not an absorbing passion like his first, but a
mingling of pity, admiration, and that tenderness which his warm heart
was ever ready to bestow. He described her as full of genius and
sensibility, a creature of fire and power, but dimmed by sorrow, and
struggling with her chains. He visited her again; he tried to comfort,
he offered to serve her. It was the first time that a manly, generous
spirit had ever presented itself to the desponding girl. The high-souled
Englishman appeared as a god beside her sordid countrymen; indeed,
Horatio would have seemed such compared with any of his sex; his
fascination is irresistible--Clorinda felt it; she loved him with
Italian fervour, and the first word of kindness from him elicited a
whole torrent of gratitude and passion. Horace had no wish to marry; his
old wound was by no means healed, but rather opened, and bled afresh,
when he was called upon to answer the enthusiastic ardour of the Italian
girl. He felt at once the difference of his feeling for her, and the
engrossing sentiment of which he had been nearly the victim. But he
could rescue her from an unworthy fate, and make her happy. He acted
with his usual determination and precipitancy, and within a month she
became his wife. Here ends my story; his letters were more concise after
his marriage. At first I attributed this to his having a new and dearer
friend, but latterly when he has written he has spoken with such
yearning fondness for home, that I fear--And then when I offered to
visit him, he negatived my proposition. How unlike Horatio! it can only
mean that his wife was averse to my coming. I have questioned slightly
any travellers from Italy. Mrs. Saville seldom appears in English
society except at balls, and then she is always surrounded by Italians.
She is decidedly correct in her conduct, but more I cannot tell. Her
letters to us are beautifully written, and of her talents, even her
genius, I do not entertain a doubt. Perhaps I am prejudiced, but I fear
a Neapolitan, or rather, I should say, I fear a convent education; and
that taste which leads her to associate with her own demonstrative,
unrefined countrymen, instead of trying to link herself to her husband's
friends. I may be wrong--I shall be glad to be found so. Will you tell
me whether I am? I rather ask you than Edward, because your feminine
eyes will discern the truth of these things quicker than he. Happy girl!
you are going to see Horatio--to find a new, gifted, fond friend; one as
superior to his fellow-creatures, as perfection is superior to frailty."

This account, remembered with more interest now that she approached the
subject of it, excited Ethel's curiosity, and she began, as they went on
their way from Rome to Naples, in a great degree to participate in
Edward's eagerness to see his cousin.




CHAPTER XI


Sad and troubled?
How brave her anger shows! How it sets off
Her natural beauty! Under what happy star
Was Virolet born, to be beloved and sought
By two incomparable women?

FLETCHER.


It was the month of December when the travellers arrived at this "piece
of heaven dropt upon earth," as the natives themselves name it. The moon
hung a glowing orb in the heavens, and lighted up the sea to beauty. A
blood-red flash shot up now and then from Vesuvius; a summer softness
was in the atmosphere, while a thousand tokens presented themselves of a
climate more friendly, more joyous, and more redundant than that of the
northern Isle from which they came. It was very late at night when they
reached their hotel, and they were heartily fatigued, so that it was not
till the next morning, that immediately after breakfast, Villiers left
Ethel, and went out to seek the abode of his cousin.

He had been gone some little time, when a waiter of the hotel, throwing
open Ethel's drawing-room door, announced "Signor Orazio." Quite new to
Italy, Ethel was ignorant of the custom in that country, of designating
people by their christian names; and that Horatio Saville, being a
resident in Naples, and married to a Neapolitan, was known everywhere by
the appellation which the servant now used. Ethel was not in the least
aware that it was Lucy's brother who presented himself to her. She saw a
gentleman, tall, very slight in person, with a face denoting habitual
thoughtfulness, and stamped by an individuality which she could not tell
whether to think plain, and yet it was certainly open and kind. An
appearance of extreme shyness, almost amounting to awkwardness, was
diffused over him, and his words came hesitatingly; he spoke English,
and was an Englishman--so much Ethel discovered by his first words,
which were, "Villiers is not at home?" and then he began to ask her
about her journey, and how she liked the view of the bay of Naples,
which she beheld from her windows. They were in this kind of trivial
conversation when Edward came bounding up-stairs, and with exclamations
of delight greeted his cousin. Ethel, infinitely surprised, examined her
guest with more care. In a few minutes she began to wonder how she came
to think him plain. His deep-set, dark-grey eyes struck her as
expressive, if not handsome. His features were delicately moulded, and
his fine forehead betokened depth of intellect; but the charm of his
face was a kind of fitful, beamy, inconstant smile, which diffused
incomparable sweetness over his physiognomy. His usual look was cold and
abstracted--his eye speculated with an inward thoughtfulness--a chilling
seriousness sat on his features, but this glancing and varying
half-smile came to dispel gloom, and to invite and please those with
whom he conversed. His voice was modulated by feeling, his language was
fluent, graceful in its turns of expression, and original in the
thoughts which it expressed. His manners were marked by high breeding,
yet they were peculiar. They were formed by his individual disposition,
and under the dominion of sensibility. Hence they were often abrupt and
reserved. He forgot the world around him, and gave token, by absence of
mind, of the absorbing nature of his contemplations. But at a touch this
vanished, and a sweet earnestness, and a beaming kindliness of spirit,
at once displaced his abstraction, rendering him attentive, cordial, and
gay.

Never had Horatio Saville appeared to so little advantage as during his
short tête-à-tête with his new relative. At all times, when
quiescent, he had a retiring manner, and an appearance, whose want of
pretension did not at first allure, and yet which afterwards formed his
greatest attraction. He was always unembarrassed, and Ethel could not
guess that towards her alone he felt as timid and shy as a girl. It was
with considerable effect that Horatio had commanded himself to appear
before the daughter of Lady Lodore. There was something incongruous and
inconceivable in the idea of the child of Cornelia a woman, married to
his cousin. He feared to see in her an image of the being who had
subdued his heart of hearts, and laid prostrate his whole soul; he
trembled to catch the sound of her voice, lest it might echo tones which
could disturb to their depths his inmost thoughts. Ethel was so unlike
her mother, that by degrees he became reassured; her eyes, her hair, her
stature, and tall slender shape, were the reverse of Lady Lodore; so
that in a little while he ventured to raise his eyes to her face, and to
listen to her, without being preoccupied by a painful sensation, which,
in its violence, resembled terror. It is true that by degrees this
dissimilarity to her mother became less; she had gestures, smiles, and
tones, that were all Lady Lodore, and which, when discerned, struck his
heart with a pang, stealing away his voice, and causing him to stand
suspended in the act he was about, like one acted upon by magic.

While this mute and curious examination was going on in the minds of
Ethel and her visitant, the conversation had not tarried. Edward had
never been so far south, and the wonders of Naples were as new to him as
to Ethel. Saville was eager to show them, and proposed going that very
day to Pompeii. For, as he said, all their winter was not like the
present day, so that it was best to seize the genial weather while it
lasted. Was Mrs. Villiers too much fatigued? On the contrary, Ethel was
quite on the alert; but first she asked whether Mrs. Saville would not
accompany them.

"Clorinda," said Horatio, "promises herself much pleasure from your
acquaintance, and intends calling on you to-day at twenty-four o'clock,
that is, at the Ave Maria: how stupid I am," he continued, laughing, "I
quite forget that you are not Italianized, as I am, and do not know the
way in which the people here count their time. Clorinda will call late
in the afternoon, the usual visiting hour at Naples, but she would find
no pleasure in visiting a ruined city and fallen fragments. One house in
the Chiaja is worth fifty Pompeiis in the eyes of a Neapolitan, and
Clorinda is one, heart and soul. I hope you will be pleased with her,
for she is an admirable specimen of her countrywomen, and they are
wonderful and often sublime creatures in their way; but do not mistake
her for an English woman, or you will be disappointed--she has not one
atom of body, one particle of mind, that bears the least affinity to
England. And now, is your carriage ordered?--there it is at the door;
so, as I should say to one of my own dear sisters, put on your bonnet,
Ethel, quickly, and do not keep us waiting; for though at Naples, days
are short in December, and we have none of their light to lose."

When, after this explanation, Ethel first saw Clorinda, she was inclined
to think that Saville had scarcely done his wife justice. Certainly she
was entirely Italian, but she was very beautiful; her complexion was
delicate, though dark and without much colour. Her hair silken and
glossy as the raven's wing; her large bright black eyes resplendent; the
perfect arch of her brows, and the marmoreal and harmonious grace of her
forehead, such as is never seen in northern lands, except in sculpture
imitated from the Greeks. The lower part of her face was not so good;
her smile was deficient in sweetness, her voice wanted melody, and
sounded loud to an English ear. Her gestures were expressive, but quick
and wanting in grace. She was more agreeable when silent and could be
regarded as a picture, than when called into action. She was
complimentary in her conversation, and her manners were winning by their
frankness and ease. She gesticulated too much, and her features were too
much in motion,--too pantomimely expressive, so to speak, not to impress
disagreeably one accustomed to the composure of the English. Still she
was a beautiful creature; young, artless, desirous to please, and
endowed, moreover, with the vivacious genius, the imaginative talent of
her country. She spoke as if she were passionately attached to her
husband; but when Ethel mentioned his English home and his relations, a
cloud came over the lovely Neapolitan's countenance, and a tremor shook
her frame. "Do not think hardly of me," she said, "I do not hate
England, but I fear it. I am sure I should be disliked there--I should
be censured, perhaps taunted, for a thousand habits and feelings as
natural to me as the air I breathe. I am proud, and I should retort
impertinence, and, displeasing my husband, become miserable beyond
words. Stay with us; you I love, and should be wretched to part from.
Stay and enjoy this paradise with us. Intreat his sisters, if they wish
to see Horatio, to come over. I will be more than a sister to them; but
let us all forget that such a place as that cold, distant England
exists."

This was Clorinda's usual mode of speaking of her husband's native
country: but once, when Ethel had urged her going there with more
earnestness than usual, suddenly her countenance became disturbed; and
with a lowering and stormy expression of face, that her English friend
could never afterwards forget, she said, "Say not another word, I pray.
Horatio loved--he loves an Englishwoman--it is torture enough for me to
know this. I would rather be torn in quarters by wild horses, broken in
pieces on the rack, than set foot in England. My cousin, as you have
pity for me, and value the life of Horace, use your influence to prevent
his only dreaming of a return to England. Methinks I could strike him
dead, if I only knew that such a thought lived for a second in his
heart."

These words said, Clorinda resumed her smiles, and was, more than usual,
desirous of flattering and pleasing Ethel; so that she softened, though
she could not erase, the impression her vehemence had made. However,
there appeared no necessity for Ethel to exert her influence. Horace was
equally averse to going to England. He loved to talk of it; he
remembered, with yearning fondness, its verdant beauty, its pretty
villages, its meandering streams, its embowered groves; the spots he had
inhabited, the trivial incidents of his daily life, were recalled with
affection: but he did not wish to return. Villiers attributed this
somewhat to his unforgotten attachment to Lady Lodore; but it was more
strange that he negatived the idea of one of his sisters visiting
him:--"She would not like it," was all the explanation he gave.

Several months passed lightly over the heads of the new-married pair;
while they, bee-like, sipped the honey of life, and, never cloyed, fed
perpetually on sweets. Naples, its galleries, its classic and beautiful
environs, offered an endless succession of occupation and amusement. The
presence of Saville elevated their pleasures; for he added the living
spirit of poetry to their sensations, and associated the treasures of
human genius with the sublime beauty of nature. He had a tact, a
delicacy, a kind of electric sympathy in his disposition, that endeared
him to every one that approached him. His very singularities, by keeping
alive an interest in him, added to the charm. Sometimes he was so
abstracted as to do the most absent things in the world; and the quick
alternations of his gaiety and seriousness were often ludicrous from
their excess. There was one thing, indeed, to which Ethel found it
difficult to accustom herself, which was his want of punctuality, which
often caused hours to be lost, and their excursions spoiled. Nor did he
ever furnish good excuses, but seemed annoyed at being questioned on the
subject.

Clorinda never joined them in their drives and rides out of the city.
She feared to trust herself to winds and waves; the heat, the breeze,
the dust, annoyed her; and she found no pleasure in looking at
mountains, which, after all, were only mountains; or ruins, which were
only ruins--stones, fit for nothing but to be removed and thrown away.
But Clorinda had an empire of her own, to which she gladly admitted her
English relatives, and the delights of which they fully appreciated.
Music, heard in such perfection at the glory of Naples, the theatre of
San Carlo, and the heavenly strains which filled the churches with an
atmosphere of sound more entrancing than incense--all these were hers;
and her own voice, rich, full, and well-cultivated, made a temple of
melody of her own home.

There was--it could not be called a wall--but there was certainly a
paling, of separation between Ethel and Clorinda. The young English girl
could not discover in what it consisted, or why she could not pass
beyond. The more she saw of the Neapolitan, the more she believed that
she liked her--certainly her admiration increased;--still she felt that
on the first day that Clorinda had visited her, with her caressing
manners and well-turned flatteries, she was quite as intimate with her
as now, after several weeks. She had surely nothing to conceal; all was
open in her conduct; yet often Ethel thought of her as a magician
guarding a secret treasure. Something there was that she watched over
and hid. There was often a look of anxiety about her which Ethel
unconsciously dispelled by some chance word; or a cloud all at once
dimmed her face, and her magnificent and dazzling eyes flashed sudden
fire, without apparent cause. There was something in her manner that
always said, "You are English, I am Italian; and there is natural war
between my fire and your snow." But no word, no act, ever betrayed
alienation of feeling. Thus a sort of mystery pervaded their
intercourse, which, though it might excite curiosity, and was not unakin
to admiration, kept the affections in check.

Sometimes Ethel thought that Clorinda feared to compromise her
salvation, for she was a Catholic. During the revelries of the Carnival,
this difference of religion was not so apparent; but when Lent began, it
showed itself, and divided them, on various occasions, more than before.
At last, Lent also was drawing to a close; and as Villiers and Ethel
were anxious to see the ceremonies of Passion Week at Rome, it was
arranged that they, and Mr. and Mrs. Saville, should visit the Eternal
City together. Horatio manifested a distaste even to the short residence
that it was agreed they should make together during the month they were
to spend at Rome; but Clorinda showed herself particularly anxious for
the fulfilment of this plan, and, the majority prevailing, the whole
party left Naples together.

Full soon was the veil of mystery then withdrawn, and Villiers and his
wife let into the arcana of their cousin's life. Horatio had yielded
unwillingly to Clorinda's intreaties, and extracted many promises from
her before he gave his consent; but all would not do--the natural, the
uncontrollable violence of her disposition broke down every barrier; and
in spite of his caution, and her struggles with herself, the reality
opened fearfully upon the English pair. The lava torrent of Neapolitan
blood flowed in her veins; and restraining it for some time, it at last
poured itself forth with volcanic violence. It was at the inn at
Terracina, on their way to Rome, that a scene took place, such as an
English person must cross Alps and Apennines to behold. Ethel had seen
that something was wrong. She saw the beauty of Clorinda vanished,
changed, melted away and awfully transformed into actual ugliness: she
saw tiger like glances from her eyes, and her lips pale and quivering.
Poor Saville strove, with gentle words, to allay the storm to which some
jealous freak gave rise: perceiving that his endeavours were vain, he
rose to quit the room. They were at dinner: she sprung on him with a
knife in her hand: Edward seized her arm; and she sunk on the floor in
convulsions. Ethel was scarcely less moved. Seeing her terrified beyond
all expression, Horatio led her from the room. He was pale--his voice
failed him. He left her; and sending Edward to her, returned to his
wife.

The same evening he said to Villiers,--"Do not ask me to stay;--let me
go without another word. You see how it is. With what Herculean labour I
have concealed this sad truth so long, is scarcely conceivable. When
Ethel's sweet smile has sometimes reproached my tardiness, I have
escaped, but half alive, from a scene like the one you witnessed.

"In a few hours, it is true, Clorinda will be shocked--full of
remorse--at my feet;--that is worse still. Her repentance is as violent
as her rage; and both transform her from a woman into something too
painful to dwell upon. She is generous, virtuous, full of power and
talent; but this fatal vehemence more than neutralizes her good
qualities. I can do nothing; I am chained to the oar. I have but one
hope: time, reason, and steadiness of conduct on my part, may subdue
her; and as she will at no distant period become a mother, softer
feelings may develop themselves. Sometimes I am violently impelled to
fly from her for ever. But she loves me, and I will not desert her. If
she will permit me, I will do my duty to the end. Let us go back now.
You will return to Naples next winter; and with this separation, which
will gall her proud spirit to its core, as a lesson, I hope by that time
that she will prove more worthy of Ethel's society."

Nothing could be said to this. Saville, though he asked, "Let us go
back," had decreed, irrevocably, in his own mind, not to advance another
step with his companions. The parting was melancholy and ominous. He
would not permit Clorinda to appear again; for, as he said, he feared
her repentance more than her violence, and would not expose Ethel as the
witness of a scene of humiliation and shame. A thousand times over, his
friends promised to return immediately to Naples, not deferring their
visit till the following winter. He was to take a house for them, for
the summer, at Castel à Mare, or Sorrento; and immediately after Easter
they were to return. These kind promises were a balm to his disturbed
mind. He watched their carriage from the inn at Terracina, as it skimmed
along the level road of the Pontine Marshes, and could not despair while
he expected its quick return. Turning his eyes away, he resumed his yoke
again; and, melancholy beyond his wont, joined his remorseful wife. They
were soon on their way back to Naples:--she less demonstrative in her
repentance, because more internally and deeply touched, than she had
ever been before.




CHAPTER XII


Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate;
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade.

SHAKSPEARE.


Parting thus sadly from their unfortunate cousin, Villiers and Ethel
were drawn together yet nearer, and, if possible, with a deeper
tenderness of affection than before. Here was an example before their
eyes, that all their fellow-creatures were not equally fortunate in the
lottery of life, and that worse than a blank befell many, while the
ticket which they had drawn was a prize beyond all summing. Edward felt
indeed disappointed at losing his cousin's society, as well as deeply
grieved at the wretched fate which he had selected for himself. Ethel,
on the contrary, was in her heart glad that he was absent. She had no
place in that heart to spare away from her husband; and however much she
liked Horatio, and worthy as he was of her friendship, she felt him as
an encroacher. Now she delivered herself up to Edward, and to the
thought of Edward solely, with fresh and genuine delight. No one stood
between her and him--none called off his attention, or forced her to
pass one second of time unoccupied by his idea. When she expressed these
feelings to Villiers, he called her selfish and narrow-hearted, yet his
pride and his affection were gratified; for he knew how true was every
word she uttered, and how without flaw or blot was her faith and her
attachment.

"And yet, my Ethel," he said, "I sometimes ask myself, how this boasted
affection of yours will stand the trials which I fear are preparing for
it."

"What trials?" she asked anxiously.

"Care, poverty; the want of all the luxuries, perhaps of the comforts of
life."

Ethel smiled again. "That is your affair," she replied, "do you rouse
your courage, if you look upon these as evils. I shall feel nothing of
all this, while near you; care--poverty--want! as if I needed any thing
except your love--you yourself--who are mine."

"Yes, dear," replied Villiers, "that is all very well at this moment;
rolling along in a comfortable carriage--an hotel ready to receive us,
with all its luxuries; but suppose us without any of these,
Ethel--suppose yourself in a melancholy, little, dingy abode, without
servants, without carriage, going out on foot."

"Not alone," replied his wife, laughing, and kissing his hand; "I shall
have you to wait on me--to wait upon--"

"You take it very well now,"
said Edward; "I hope that you will never be put to the trial. I am far
from anticipating this excess of wretchedness, of course, but I cannot
help feeling, that the prospects of to-morrow are uncertain, and I am
anxious for my long-delayed letters from England."

With Ethel's deep and warm affection, had she been ten or only five
years older, she also must have participated in Edward's inquietude. But
care is a word, not an emotion, for the very young. She was only
seventeen. She had never attended to the disbursements of money--she was
ignorant of the mechanism of giving and receiving, on which the course
of our life depends. It was in vain that she sought in the interior of
her mind for an image that should produce fear or regret, with regard to
the absence or presence of money. No one reflection or association
brought into being an idea on the subject. Again she kissed Edward's
hand, and looked on him with her soft clear eyes, thinking only, "He is
here--and Heaven has given me all I ask."

Left again to themselves, they were anxious to avoid acquaintances. Yet
this was impossible during the Holy Week at Rome. Villiers found many
persons whom he knew; women of high rank and fashion, men of wealth, or
with the appearance of it, enjoying the present, and, while away from
England, unencumbered by care. Mr. and Mrs. Villiers were among these,
and of them; their rank and their style of living resembling theirs,
associated them together. All this was necessary to Edward, for he had
been accustomed to it--it was natural to Ethel, because, being wholly
inexperienced, she did as others did, and as Villiers wished her to do,
without reflection or forethought.

Yet each day added to Edward's careful thoughts. Easter was gone, and
the period approached when they had talked of returning to Naples. The
covey of English had taken flight towards the north; they were almost
the only strangers in the ancient and silent city, whose every stone
breathes of a world gone by--whose surpassing beauty crowns her still
the glory of the world. The English pair, left to themselves, roamed
through the ruins and loitered in the galleries, never weary of the very
ocean of beauty and grandeur which they coursed over in their summer
bark. The weather grew warm, for the month of May had commenced, and
they took refuge in the vast churches from the heat; at twilight they
sought the neighbouring gardens, or scrambled about the Coliseum, or the
more ruined and weedgrown baths of Caracalla. The fire-flies came out,
and the splashing of the many fountains reached their ears from afar,
while the clear azure of the Roman sky bent over them in beauty and
peace.

Ethel never alluded to their proposed return to Naples--she feared each
day to hear Villiers mention it--she was so happy where she was, she
shrunk from any change. The majesty, the simplicity, the quiet of Rome,
were in unison with the holy stillness that dwelt in her soul, absorbed
as it was by one unchanging image. She had reached the summit of human
happiness--she had nothing more to ask; her full heart, not bursting,
yet gently overflowing in its bliss, thanked Heaven, and drew nearer
Edward, and was at peace.

"God help us!" exclaimed Villiers, "I wonder what on earth will become
of us!"

They were sitting together on fragment of the Coliseum; they had
clambered up its fallen wall, and reached a kind of weed-grown chasm
whose depth, as it was moonlight, they could not measure by the eye; so
they sat beside it on a small fragment, and Villiers held Ethel close to
him lest she should fall. The heartfelt and innocent caress of two
united in the sight of Heaven, wedded together for the endurance of the
good and ills of life, hallowed the spot and hour; and then, even while
Ethel nestled nearer to him in fondness, Edward made the exclamation
that she heard with a wonder which mingled with, yet could not disturb,
the calm joy which she felt.

"What but good can come of us, while we are thus?" she asked.

"You will not listen to me, nor understand me," replied her husband.
"But I do assure you, that our position is more than critical. No
remittances, no letters come from England; we are in debt here--in debt
in Italy! A thousand miles from our resources! I grope in the dark and
see no outlet--every day's post, with the nothing that it brings, adds
to my anxiety."

"All will be well," replied Ethel gently; "no real evil will happen to
us, be assured."

"I wish," said Villiers, "your experience, instead of your ignorance,
suggested the assertion. I would rather die a thousand deaths than apply
to dear Horace, who is ill enough off himself; but every day here adds
to our difficulties. Our only hope is in our instant return to
England--and, by heavens!--you kiss me, Ethel, as if we lived in fairy
land, and that such were our food--have you no fears?"

"I am sorry to say, none," she answered in a soft voice; "I wish I could
contrive some, because I appear unsympathizing to you--but I cannot
fear;--you are in health and near me. Heaven and my dear father's spirit
will watch over us, and all will be well. This is the end and beginning
of my anxiety; so dismiss yours, love--for, believe me, in a day or two,
these forebodings of yours will be as a dream."

"It is very strange," replied Edward, "were you not so close to me, I
should fancy you a spirit instead of a woman; you seem to have no touch
of earthly solicitude. Well, I will do as you bid me, and hope for
to-morrow. And now let us get down from this place before the moon sets
and leaves us in darkness."

As if to confirm the auguries of Ethel, the following morning brought
the long-expected letters. One contained a remittance, another was from
Colonel Villiers, to say, that Edward's immediate presence was requisite
in England to make the final arrangements before his marriage. With a
glad heart Villiers turned his steps northward; while Ethel, if she
could have regretted aught while with him, would have sighed to leave
their lonely haunts in Rome. She well knew that whatever of sublime
nature might display, or man might congregate of beautiful in art
elsewhere, there was a calm majesty, a silent and awful repose in the
ruins of Rome, joined to the delights of a southern climate, and the
luxuriant vegetation of a sunny soil, more in unison with her single and
devoted heart, than any other spot in the universe could boast. They
would both have rejoiced to have seen Saville again; yet they were
unacknowledgedly glad not to pursue their plan of domesticating near him
at Naples. A remediless evil, which is for ever the source of fresh
disquietude, is one that tasks human fortitude and human patience, more
than those vaster misfortunes which elevate while they wound. The proud
aspiring spirit of man craves something to raise him from the dust, and
to adorn his insignificance; he seeks to strengthen his alliance with
the lofty and the eternal, and shrinks from low-born cares, as being the
fetters and bolts that link him to his baser origin. Saville, the slave
of a violent woman's caprice, struggling with passions, at once so fiery
and so feeble as to excite contempt, was a spectacle which they were
glad to shun. Their own souls were in perfect harmony, and discord was
peculiarly abhorrent to them.

They travelled by the beaten route of Mont Cenis, Lyons, and Calais, and
in less than a month arrived in England. As the presence of Villiers was
requisite in London, after staying a few days at an hotel in
Brook-street, they took a furnished house in the same street for a short
time. The London season had passed its zenith, but its decline was
scarcely perceptible. Ethel had no wish to enter into its gaieties, and
it had been Edward's plan to avoid them until they were richer. But here
they were, placed by fate in the very midst of them; and as, when their
affairs were settled, they intended again to return abroad, he could not
refuse himself the pleasure of seeing Ethel, in the first flower of her
loveliness, mingling with, and outshining, every other beauty of her
country. It would have been difficult indeed, placed within the verge of
the English aristocracy assembled in London, to avoid its engagements
and pleasures--for he "also was an Arcadian," and made one of the
self-enthroned "world." The next two months, therefore, while still
every settlement was delayed by his father, they spent in the
fashionable circles of London.

They did not indeed enter into its amusements with the zest and
resolution of tyros. To Villiers the scene was not new, and therefore
not exceedingly enticing; and Ethel's mind was not of the sort to be
borne along in the stream of folly. They avoided going to crowded
entertainments--they were always satisfied with one or two parties in
the evening. Nay, once or twice in the week they usually remained at
home, and not unseldom dined tête-à-tête. The serpent fang of
pleasure, and the paltry ambition of society, had no power over Ethel.
She often enjoyed herself, because she often met people of either sex,
whose fame, or wit, or manners, interested and pleased her. But as
little vanity as mortal woman ever had fell to her share. Very young,
and (to use the phrase of the day) very new, flattery and admiration
glanced harmlessly by her. Her personal vanity was satisfied when
Villiers was pleased, and, for the rest, she was glad to improve her
mind, and to wear away the timidity, which she felt that her lonely
education had induced, by mingling with the best society of her country.

She had also some curiosity, and as she promised herself but a brief
sojourn in this land of lions, she wished to see several things and
persons she might never come in contact with again. Various names which
had reached her in the Illinois, here grew from shadows into real human
beings--ministers of state, beauties, authors, and wits. She visited
once or twice the ventilator of St. Stephen's, and graced a red bench of
the House of Lords on the prorogation of Parliament. Villiers was very
much pleased with her throughout. His pride was gratified by the
approval she elicited from all. Men admired her, but distantly--as a
being they could not rudely nor impertinently approach. Women were not
afraid of her, because they saw, that though she made no display of
conjugal attachment, she loved her husband. Her extreme youth, the
perpetual sunshine of her countenance, and the gentle grace of her
manners, won more the liking than the praise of her associates. They
drew near her as to one too untaught to understand their mysteries, and
too innocent to judge them severely; an atmosphere of kindness and of
repose followed her wherever she went: this her husband felt more than
any other, and he prized his Ethel at the worth she so truly deserved.

One of the reasons which caused Mrs. Villiers to avoid large assemblies,
was that Lady Lodore was in town, and that in such places they sometimes
met. Ethel did not well know how to act. Youth is ever fearful of making
unwelcome demonstration, and false shame often acts more powerfully to
influence it, than the call of duty or the voice of affection. Villiers
had no desire to bring the mother and daughter together, and stood
neutral. Lady Lodore had once or twice recognized her by a bow and a
smile, but after such, she always vanished and was seen no more that
evening. Ethel often yearned to approach, to claim her tenderness and to
offer her filial affection. Villiers laughed at such flights. "The safe
thing to do," he said, "is to take the tone of Lady Lodore. She is held
back by no bashfulness--she does the thing she wishes, without
hesitation or difficulty. Did she desire her lovely grown-up daughter to
play a child's part towards her, she would soon contrive to bring it
about. Lady Lodore is a woman of the world--she was nursed in its
lessons, and piously adheres to its code; its ways are her's, and the
objects of ambition which it holds out, are those which she desires to
attain. She is talked of as admired and followed by the Earl of D----. You
may spoil all, if you put yourself forward."

Ethel was not quite satisfied. The voice of nature was awake within, and
she yearned to claim her mother's affection. Until now, she had regarded
her more as a stranger; but at this time, a filial instinct stirred her
heart, impelling her to some outward act--some demonstration of duty.
Whenever she saw Lady Lodore, which was rarely, and at a distance, she
gazed earnestly on her, and tried to read within her soul, whether Villiers
was right, and her mother happy. The shining, uniform outside of a woman
of fashion baffled her endeavours without convincing her. One evening at
the Opera, she discerned Lady Lodore in the tier below her. Ethel drew
back and shaded herself with the curtain of her box, so that she could
not be perceived, while she watched her mother intently. A succession of
visitors came into Lady Lodore's box, and she spoke to all with the
animation of a heart at ease. There was an almost voluptuous repose in
her manner and appearance, that contrasted with, while it adorned, the
easy flow of her conversation, and the springtide of wit, which, to
judge from the amusement of her auditors, flowed from her lips. Yet
Ethel fancied that her smile was often forced, so suddenly did it
displace an expression of listlessness and languor, which when she
turned from the people in her box to the stage, came across her
countenance like a shadow. It might be the gas, which shadows so
unbecomingly the fair audience at the King's Theatre; it might be the
consequences of raking, for Lady Lodore was out every night; but Ethel
thought that she saw a change; she was less brilliant, her person
thinner, and had lost some of its exquisite roundness. Still, as her
daughter gazed, she thought, She is not happy. Yet what could she do?
How pour sweetness into the bitter stream of life? As Villiers had said,
any advance of hers might spoil all. The sister of the nobleman he had
mentioned, was her companion at the opera. Lord D----himself came, though
late, to fetch her away. She had therefore her own prospects, her own
plans, which doubtless she desired to pursue undisturbed, however they
might fail to charm away the burthen of life.

Once, and only once, Ethel heard her mother's voice, and was spoken to
by her. She had gone to hear the speech from the throne, on the
prorogation of Parliament. She got there late, so that every bench was
filled. Room was made for her near the throne, immediately under the
gallery, (as the house was constructed until last year,) but she was
obliged to be separated from her party, and sat half annoyed at being
surrounded by strangers. A peer, whom she recognized as the Earl of D----,
came up, and entered into conversation with the lady sitting behind her.
Could it be her mother? She remembered, that as she sat down she had
glanced at some one whom she thought she knew, and she did not doubt that
this was Lady Lodore. A sudden thrill passed as an electric shock through
her frame, every joint in her body trembled, her knees knocked together,
and the colour forsook her cheeks. She tried to rally. Why should she
feel agitated, as if possessed by terror, on account of this near
contact with the dearest relation Heaven has bestowed on its creatures?
Why not turn; and if she did not speak, claim, with beseeching eyes, her
mother's love? Was it indeed her? The lady spoke, and her voice entered
and stirred Ethel's beating heart with strange emotion; every drop of
blood within her seemed to leap at the sound; but she sat still as a
statue, saying to herself, "When Lord D----leaves her I will turn and
speak." After some trivial conversation on topics of the day, the peers
were ordered to take their seats, and Lord D----departed;--then Ethel
tried to summon all her courage; but now the doors were thrown open, the
king entered, and every one stood up. At this moment,--as she, in the
confusion of being called upon, while abstracted, to do any act, however
slight, had for a moment half forgotten her mother,--her arm was
touched; and the same voice which had replied to Lord D----, said to her,
"Your ear-ring is unfastened, Ethel; it will fall out." Ethel could not
speak; she raised her hands, mechanically, to arrange the ornament; but
her trembling fingers refused to perform the office. "Permit me," said
the lady, drawing off her glove; and Ethel felt her mother's hand touch
her cheek: her very life stood suspended; it was a bitter pain, yet a
pleasure inconceivable; there was a suffocation in her throat, and the
tears filled her eyes; but even the simple words, "I thank you," died on
her lips--her voice could frame no sound. The world, and all within its
sphere, might have passed away at that moment, and she been unconscious
of any change. "Yes, she will love me!" was the idea that spoke audibly
within; and a feeling of confidence, a flow of sympathy and enthusiastic
affection, burst on her heart. As soon as she could recollect herself,
she turned: Lady Lodore was no longer there; she had glided from her
seat; and Ethel just caught a glimpse of her, as she contrived another
for herself, behind a column, which afterwards so hid her, that her
daughter could only see the waving of her plumes. On these she fixed her
eyes until all was over; and then Lady Lodore went out hurriedly, with
averted face, as if to escape her recognition. This put the seal on
Ethel's dream. She believed that her mother obviously signified her
desire that they should continue strangers to each other. It was hard,
but she must submit. She had no longer that prejudice against Lady
Lodore, that exaggerated notion of her demerits, which the long exile of
her father, and the abhorrence of Mrs. Fitzhenry, had before instilled.
Her mother was no longer a semi-gorgon, hid behind a deceptive mask--a
Medea, without a touch of human pity. She was a lovely, soft-voiced,
angelic-looking woman, whom she would have given worlds to be permitted
to love and wait upon. She found excuses for her errors; she lavished
admiration on all her attractions; she could do all but muster courage
to vanquish the obstacles that existed to their intercourse. She fondly
cherished her image, as an idol placed in the sanctuary of her heart,
which she could regard with silent reverence and worship, but whose
concealing veil she could not raise. Villiers smiled when she spoke in
this way to him. He saw, in her enthusiasm, the overflowing of an
affectionate heart, which longed to exhaust itself in loving. He kissed
her, and bade her think any thing, so that she did nothing. The time for
doing had indeed, for the present, passed away. Lady Lodore left town;
and when mother and daughter met again, it was not destined to be
beneath a palace roof, surrounded by the nobility of the land.




CHAPTER XIII


I choose to comfort myself by considering, that even
while I am lamenting my present uneasiness, it is
passing away.

HORACE WALPOLE.


An event occurred at this time, which considerably altered the plans of
Mr. and Mrs. Villiers. They had been invited to spend some time at
Maristow Castle, and were about to proceed thither with Lord Maristow
and his daughters, when the sudden death of Mr. Saville changed every
thing. He died of a malignant fever, leaving a young widow, and no
child, to inherit his place in society.

Through this unlooked-for event, Horatio became the immediate heir of
his father's title. He stept, from the slighted position of a younger
son into the rank of the eldest; and thus became another being in all
men's eyes--but chiefly in his father's.

Viscount Maristow had deeply regretted his son's foreign marriage, and
argued against his choice of remaining abroad. He was a statesman, and
conceived that Horatio's talents and eloquence would place him high
among the legislators of St. Stephen's. The soundness of his
understanding, and the flowing brilliancy of his language, were pledges
of his success. But Saville was not ambitious. His imagination rose high
above the empty honours of the world--to be useful was a better aim; but
he did not conceive that his was a mind calculated to lead others in its
train: its framework was too delicate, too finely strung, to sound in
accord with the many. He wanted the desire to triumph; and was content
to adore truth in the temple of his own mind, without defacing its
worship by truckling to the many falsehoods and errors which demand
subserviency in the world.

Lord Maristow had hitherto submitted to his disappointment, not without
murmurs, but without making any great effort at victory. He had written
many letters intreating his son to cast off the drowsy Neapolitan
sloth;--he had besought Villiers, previous to his departure the
preceding year, to bring his cousin back with him;--and this was all.

The death of his eldest son quickened him to exertion. He resolved to
trust no longer to written arguments, but to go himself to Italy, and by
force of paternal authority, or persuasions, to induce his son to come
back to his native country, and to fill with honour the post to which
fortune had advanced him. He did not doubt that Horatio would himself
feel the force of his new duties; but it would be clenching his purpose,
and paying an agreeable compliment to Clorinda, to make this journey,
and to bring them back with him when he returned. Whatever Mrs.
Saville's distaste to England might be, it must yield to the necessity
that now drew her thither. Lord Maristow could not imagine any
resistance so violent as to impede his wishes. The projected journey
charmed his daughters, saddened as they were by their recent loss. Lucy
was overjoyed at the prospect of seeing her beloved brother. She felt
sure that Clorinda would be brought to reason and thus, with their
hearts set upon one object, one idea, they bade adieu to Ethel and her
husband, as if their career was to be as sunny and as prosperous as they
doubted not that their own would be.

Lord Maristow alone guessed how things might stand. "Edward, my dear
boy," he said, "give me credit for great anxiety on your account. I wish
this marriage of yours had not taken place, then you might have roughed
it as other young men do, and have been the better for a little tart
experience. I do not like this shuffling on your father's part. I hear
for a certainty that this marriage of his will come to nothing--the
friends of the young lady are against it, and she is very young, and
only an heiress by courtesy--her father can give her as many tens of
thousands as he pleases, but he has sworn not to give her a shilling if
she marries without his consent; and he has forbidden Colonel Villiers
his house. He still continues at Cheltenham, and assures every one that
he is on safe ground; that the girl loves him, and that when once his,
the father must yield. It is too ridiculous to see him playing a
boy-lover's part at his time of life, trying to undermine a daughter's
sense of duty--he, who may soon be a grandfather! The poor little thing,
I am told, is quite fascinated by his dashing manners and station in
society. We shall see how it will end--I fear ill; her father might
pardon a runaway match with a lover of her own age; but he will never
forgive the coldblooded villany, excuse me, of a man of three times her
age; who for gain, and gain only, is seeking to steal her from him. Such
is the sum of what I am told by a friend of mine, just arrived from
Cheltenham. The whole thing is the farce of the day, and the stolen
interviews of the lovers, and the loud, vulgarly-spoken denunciations of
her father, vary the scene from a travestie of Romeo and Juliet to the
comedies of Plautus or Molière. I beg your pardon, Edward, for my
frankness, but I am angry. I have been used as a cat's-paw--I have been
treated unfairly--I was told that the marriage wanted but your
signature--my representations induced you to offer to Miss Fitzhenry,
and now you are a ruined man. I am hampered by my own family, and cannot
come forward to your assistance. My advice is, that you wait a little,
and see what turn matters take; once decided, however they conclude,
strong representations shall be made to your father, and he shall be
forced to render proper assistance; then if politics take a better turn,
I may do something for you--or you can live abroad till better times."

Villiers thanked Lord Maristow for his advice, and made no remarks
either on his details or promises. He saw his own fate stretched
drearily before him; but his pride made him strong to bear without any
outward signs of wincing. He would suffer all, conceal all, and be
pitied by none. The thought of Ethel alone made him weak. Were she
sheltered during the storm which he saw gathering so darkly, he would
have felt satisfied.

What was to be done? To go abroad, was to encounter beggary and famine.
To remain, exposed him to a thousand insults and dangers from which
there was no escape. Such were the whisperings of despair--but brighter
hopes often visited him. All could not be so evil as it seemed. Fortune,
so long his enemy, would yield at last one inch of ground--one inch to
stand upon, where he might wait in patience for better days. Had he
indeed done his utmost to avert the calamities he apprehended? Certainly
not. Thus spoke his sanguine spirit: more could and should be done. His
father might find means, he himself be enabled to arrange with his
lawyer some mode of raising a sum of money which would at least enable
him to go on the continent with his wife. He spent his thoughts in
wishes for the attainment of this desirable conclusion to his adversity,
till the very earnestness of his expectations seemed to promise their
realization. It could not be that the worst would come. Absurd!
Something must happen to assist them. Seeking for this unknown something
which, in spite of all his efforts, would take no visible or tangible
form, he spent weary days and sleepless nights, his brain spinning webs
of thought, not like those of the spider, useful to their weaver--a
tangled skein they were rather, where the clue was inextricably hid. He
did not speak of these things to Ethel, but he grew sad, and she was
anxious to go out of town, to have him all to herself, when she promised
herself to dispel his gloom; and, as she darkly guessed at the source of
his disquietude, by economy and a system of rigid privation, to show him
how willing and able she was to meet the adversity which he so much
dreaded.




CHAPTER XIV


The pure, the open, prosperous love,
That pledged on earth, and sealed above,
Grows in the world's approving eyes,
In friendship's smile and home's caress,
Collecting all the heart's sweet ties
Into one knot of happiness.

LALLA ROOKH.


Another month withered away in fruitless expectation. Villiers felt that
he was following an ignis fatuus, yet knew not how to give up his
pursuit. At length, he listened more docilely to Ethel's representations
of the expediency of quitting town. She wished to pay her long-promised
visit to her aunt, and Villiers at last consented to accompany her. They
gave up their house, dispersed a tolerably numerous establishment, and
left town for their sober and rural seclusion in Essex.

Taken from the immediate scene where care met him at every turn,
Edward's spirits rose; and the very tranquillity and remoteness of
Longfield became a relief and an enjoyment. It was bright October
weather. The fields were green, the hedges yet in verdant trim. The air
was so still that the dead leaves hung too lazy to fall, from the
topmost boughs of the earlier trees. The oak was still dressed in a dark
sober green--the fresh July shoot, having lost its summer hue, was
unapparent among the foliage; the varying tints of beach, ash, and elm,
diversified the woods. The morning and evening skies were resplendent
with crimson and gold, and the moonlight nights were sweeter than the
day.

Fatigued by the hurry of town, and one at least worn out with care, the
young pair took a new lease of love in idleness in this lonely spot. A
slight attack of rheumatism confined Aunt Bessy to her chimney-corner,
but in spite of her caution to Ethel not to incur the same penalty from
all the array of wet walks and damp shoes, it was her best pleasure each
morning to tie on her bonnet, take her husband's arm, and they wandered
away together, returning only to find their horses ready, and then they
departed for hours, coming back late and unwillingly after the sun was
down. Mrs. Elizabeth wondered where all the beautiful spots were, which
Ethel described so enthusiastically as to be found in the neighbourhood.
The good lady longed to go out herself to see if she could not reap
equal delight from viewing the grouping of trees, whose various autumnal
tints were painted in Ethel's speech with hues too bright for earth, or
to discover what there could be so extraordinarily picturesque in a
moss-grown cottage, near a brook, with a high bank clothed with wood
behind, which she believed must be one Dame Nixon's cottage, in the Vale
of Bewling, and which she knew she must have passed a thousand times,
and yet she had never noticed its beauty. Very often Ethel could give no
information of whither they had been, only they had lost themselves in
majestic woods, lingered in winding lanes, which led to resplendent
views, or even reached the margin of the barren sea, to behold the
enveloping atmosphere reflected in its fitful mirror--to watch the
progress of evanescent storms, or to see the moon light up her silvery
pathway on the dusky waste. Villiers took his gun with him in his walks,
but, though American bred, Ethel was so unfeignedly distressed by the
sight of death, that he never brought down a bird: he shot in its
direction now and then, to keep his pointer in practice, and to laugh at
his wife's glad triumph when he missed his feathery mark.

Ethel was especially delighted to renew her acquaintance with Longfield,
her father's boyhood home, under such sunny circumstances. She had loved
it before: with anguish in her heart, and heavy sadness weighing on her
steps, she had loved it for his sake. But now that it became the home,
the dedicated garden of love, it received additional beauty in her eyes
from its association with the memory of Lord Lodore. All things conjoined;
the season, calmed and brightened, as if for her especial enjoyment;
remembrance of the past, and the undivided possession of her Edward's
society, combined to steep her soul in happiness. Even he, whose more
active and masculine spirit might have fretted in solitude and sloth,
was subdued by care and uncertainty to look on the peace of the present
moment as the dearest gift of the gods. Both so young, and the minds of
both open as day to each other's eyes, no single blot obscured their
intercourse. They never tired of each other, and the teeming spirit of
youth filled the empty space of each hour as it came, with a new growth
of sentiments and ideas. The long evening had its pleasures, with its
close-drawn curtains and cheerful fire. Even whist with the white-haired
parson, and Mrs. Fitzhenry in her spectacles, imparted pleasure. Could
any thing duller have been devised, which would have been difficult, it
had not been so to them; and a stranger coming in and seeing their
animated looks, and hearing their cheerful tones and light-hearted
laugh, must have envied the very Elysium of delight, which aunt Bessy's
usually so sober drawing-room contained. Merely to see Ethel leaning on
her husband's arm, and looking up in his face as he drew her yet closer,
and, while his fingers were twined among her silken ringlets, kissed so
fondly her fair brow, must have demonstrated to a worldling the
irrefragable truth that happiness is born a twin, love being the parent.

The beauty of a pastoral picture has but short duration in this cloudy
land,--and happiness, the sun of our moral existence, is yet more fitful
in its visitations. Villiers and his young wife took their accustomed
ride through shady lanes and copses, and through parks, where, though
the magnificent features of nature were wanting, the eye was delighted
by a various prospect of wood and lawny upland. The soft though wild
west wind drove along vast masses of snowy clouds, which displayed in
their intervals the deep stainless azure of the boundless sky. The
shadows of the clouds now darkened the pathway of our riders, and now
they saw the sunlight advance from a distance, coming on with steps of
light and air, till it reached them, and they felt the warmth and
gladness of sunshine descend on them. The various coloured woods were
now painted brightly in the beams, and now half lost in shadow. There
was life and action everywhere--yet not the awakening activity of
spring, but rather a vague, uneasy restlessness, allied to languor, and
pregnant with melancholy.

Villiers was silent and sad. Ethel too well knew the cause wherefore he
was dispirited. He had received letters that morning which stung him
into a perception of the bitter realities which were gathering about
them. One was to say that no communication had been received from his
father, but that it was believed that he was somewhere in London--the
other was from his banker, to remind him that he had overdrawn his
credit--nearly the most disagreeable intelligence a man can hear when he
possesses no immediate means of replenishing his drained purse. Ethel
was grieved to see him pained, but she could not acutely feel these
pecuniary distresses. She tried to divert his thoughts by conversation,
and pointing out the changes which the advancing season made in the
aspect of the country.

"Yes," said Villiers, "it is a beautiful world; poets tell us this, and
religious men have drawn an argument for their creed from the wisdom and
loveliness displayed in the external universe, which speaks to every
heart and every understanding. The azure canopy fretted with golden
lights, or, as now, curtained by wondrous shapes, which, though they are
akin to earth, yet partake the glory of the sky--the green expanse,
variegated by streams, teeming with life, and prolific of food to
sustain that life, and that very food the chief cause of the beauty we
enjoy--with such magnificence has the Creator set forth our table--all
this, and the winds that fan us so balmily, and the flowers that enchant
our sight--do not all these make earth a type of heaven?"

Ethel turned her eyes on him to read in his face the expression of the
enthusiasm and enjoyment that seemed to dictate his words. But his
countenance was gloomy, and as he continued to speak, his expressions
took more the colour of his uneasy feelings. "How false and senseless
all this really is!" he pursued. "Find a people who truly make earth,
its woods and fells, and inclement sky, their unadorned dwelling-place,
who pluck the spontaneous fruits of the soil, or slay the animals as
they find them, attending neither to culture nor property, and we give
them the name of barbarians and savages--untaught, uncivilized,
miserable beings--and we, the wiser and more refined, hunt and
exterminate them:--we, who spend so many words, either as preachers or
philosophers, to vaunt that with which they are satisfied, we feel
ourselves the greater, the wiser, the nobler, the more barriers we place
between ourselves and nature, the more completely we cut ourselves off
from her generous but simple munificence."

"But is this necessary?" asked the forest-bred girl: "when I lived in the
wilds of the Illinois--the simplest abode, food and attire, were all I
knew of human refinements, and I was satisfied."

Villiers did not appear to heed her remark, but continued the train of
his own reflections. "The first desire of man is not for wealth nor
luxury, but for sympathy and applause. He desires to remove to the
furthest extremity of the world contempt and degradation; and according
to the ideas of the society in which he is bred, so are his desires
fashioned. We, the most civilized, high-bred, prosperous people in the
world, make no account of nature, unless we add the ideas of possession,
and of the labours of man. We rate each individual, (and we all desire
to be rated as individuals, distinct from and superior to the mass,) not
by himself, but by his house, his park, his income. This is a trite
observation, yet it appears new when it comes home: what is lower,
humbler, more despicable than a poor man? Give him learning, give him
goodness--see him with manners acquired in poverty, habits dyed in the
dusky hues of penury; and if we do not despise him, yet we do not admit
him to our tables or society. Refinement may only be the varnish of the
picture, yet it is necessary to make apparent to the vulgar eye even the
beauties of Raphael."

"To the vulgar eye!" repeated Ethel, emphatically.

"And I seem one of those, by the way I speak," said Edward, smiling.
"Yet, indeed, I do not despise any man for being poor, except myself. I
can feel pride in showing honour where honour is due, even though clad
in the uncouth and forbidding garb of plebeianism; but I cannot claim
this for myself--I cannot demand the justice of men, which they would
nickname pity. The Illinois would be preferable far."

"And the Illinois might be a paradise," said Ethel.

"We hope for a better--we hope for Italy. Do you remember Rome and the
Coliseum, my love?--Naples, the Chiaja, and San Carlo?--these were
better than the savannas of the west. Our hopes are good; it is the
present only which is so thorny, so worse than barren: like the souls of
Dante, we have a fiery pass to get through before we reach our place of
bliss; that we have it in prospect will gift us with fortitude.
Meanwhile I must string myself to my task. Ethel, dearest, I shall go to
town to-morrow."

"And I with you, surely?"

"Do not ask it; this is your first lesson in the lore you were so ready
to learn, of bearing all for me--"

"With you," interrupted his wife.

"With me--it shall soon be," replied Edward; "but to speak according to
the ways of this world, my presence in London is necessary for a few
days--for a very few days; a journey there and back for me is nothing,
but it would be a real and useless expense if you went. Indeed, Ethel,
you must submit to my going without you--I ask it of you, and you will
not refuse."

"A few days, you say," answered Ethel--"a very few days? It is hard. But
you will not be angry, if I should join you if your return is delayed?"

"You will not be so mad," said Villiers. "I go with a light heart,
because I leave you in security and comfort. I will return--I need not
protest--you know that I shall return the moment I can. I speak of a few
days; it cannot be a week: let me go then, with what satisfaction I may,
to the den of darkness and toil, and not be farther annoyed by the fear
that you will not support my absence with cheerfulness. As you love me,
wait for me with patience--remain with your aunt till I return."

"I will stay for a week, if it must be so," replied Ethel.

"Indeed, my love, it must--nor will I task you beyond--before a week is
gone by, you shall see me."

Ethel looked wistfully at him, but said no more. She thought it
hard--she did not think it right that he should go--that he should toil
and suffer without her; but she had no words for argument or contention,
so she yielded. The next morning--a cold but cheerful morning--at seven
o'clock, she drove over with him in Mrs. Fitzhenry's little pony chaise
to the town, four miles off, through which the stages passed. A first
parting is a kind of landmark in life--a starting post whence we begin
our career out of illusion and the land of dreams, into reality and
endurance. They arrived not a moment too soon: she had yet a thousand
things to say--one or two very particular things, which she had reserved
for the last moment; there was no time, and she was forced to
concentrate all her injunctions into one word, "Write!"

"Every day--and do you."

"It will be my only pleasure," replied his wife. "Take care of
yourself."

He was on the top of the stage and gone; and Ethel felt that a blank
loneliness had swallowed up the dearest joy of her life.

She drew her cloak round her--she gazed along the road--there were no
traces of him--she gave herself up to thought, and as he was the object
of all her thoughts, this was her best consolation. She reviewed the
happy days they had spent together--she dwelt on the memory of his
unalterable affection and endearing kindness, and then tears rushed into
her eyes. "Will any ill ever befall him?" she thought. "O no, none ever
can! he must be rewarded for his goodness and his love. How dear he
ought to be to me! Did he not take the poor friendless girl from
solitude and grief; and disdaining neither her poverty nor her orphan
state, give her himself, his care, his affection? O, my Edward! what
would Ethel have been without you? Her father was gone--her mother
repulsed her--she was alone in the wide world, till you generously made
her your own!"

With the true enthusiasm of passion, Ethel delighted to magnify the
benefits she had received, and to make those which she herself conferred
nothing, that gratitude and love might become yet stronger duties. In
her heart, though she reproached herself for what she termed
selfishness, she could not regret his poverty and difficulties, if thus
she should acquire an opportunity of being useful to him; but she felt
herself defrauded of her best privileges, of serving and consoling, by
their separation.

Thus,--now congratulating herself on her husband's attachment, now
repining at the fate that divided them,--agitated by various emotions
too sweet and bitter for words, she returned to Longfield. Aunt Bessy
was in her arm-chair, waiting for her to begin breakfast. Edward's seat
was empty--his cup was not placed--he was omitted in the domestic
arrangements;--tears rushed into her eyes; and in vain trying to calm
herself, she sobbed aloud. Aunt Bessy was astonished; and when all the
explanation she got was, "He is gone!" she congratulated herself, that
her single state had spared her the endurance of these conjugal
distresses.




CHAPTER XV


How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen,
What old December's bareness every where!

SHAKSPEARE.


Ethel cheered herself to amuse her aunt; and, as in her days of hopeless
love, she tried to shorten the hours by occupation. It was difficult;
for all her thoughts were employed in conjectures as to where Edward
was, what doing--in looking at her watch, and following in her mind all
his actions--or in meditating how hereafter she might remedy any
remissness on her part, (so tender was her conscience,) and best
contribute to his happiness. Such reveries beguiled many hours, and
enabled her to endure with some show of courage the pains of absence.
Each day she heard from him--each day she wrote, and this entire pouring
out of herself on paper formed the charm of her existence. She
endeavoured to persuade him how fortunate their lot might hereafter
be--how many of his fears were unfounded or misplaced.

"Remember, dearest love," she said, "that I have nothing of the fine
lady about me. I do not even feel the want of those luxuries so
necessary to most women. This I owe to my father. It was his first care,
while he brought me up in the most jealous retirement, to render me
independent of the services of others. Solitude is to me no evil, and
the delight of my life would be to wait upon you. I am not therefore an
object of pity, when fortunes deprives me of the appurtenances of
wealth, which rather annoy than serve me. My devotion and sacrifice, as
you are pleased to call the intense wish of my heart to contribute to
your happiness, are nothing. I sacrifice all, when I give up one hour of
your society--there is the sting--there the merit of my permitting you
to go without me. I can ill bear it. I am impatient and weak; do not
then, Edward dearest, task me too far--recall me to your side, if your
return is delayed--recall your fond girl to the place near your heart,
where she desires to remain for ever."

Villiers answered with few but expressive words of gratitude and
fidelity. His letters breathed disappointment and anxiety. "It is too
true," he said, "as I found it announced when I first came to town, my
father is married. He got the banns published in an obscure church in
London; he persuaded Miss Gregory to elope with him, and they are
married. Her father is furious, he returns every letter unopened; his
house and heart, he says, are still open to his daughter--but the--, I
will not repeat his words, who stole her from him, shall never benefit
by a shilling of his money--let her return, and all shall be
pardoned--let her remain with her husband, and starve, he cares not. My
father has spent much time and more money on this pursuit: in the hope
of securing many thousands, he raised hundreds at a prodigal and ruinous
interest, which must now be paid. He has not ten pounds in the world--so
he says. My belief is, that he is going abroad to secure to himself the
payment of the scanty remnant of his income. I have no hopes. I would
beg at the corner of a street, rather than apply to a man who never has
been a parent to me, and whose last act is that of a villain. Excuse me;
you will be angry that I speak thus of my father, but I know that he
speaks of the poor girl he has deluded, with a bitterness and insult,
which prove what his views were in marrying her. In this moment of
absolute beggary, my only resource is to raise money. I believe I shall
succeed; and the moment I have put things in train, with what heartfelt,
what unspeakable joy, shall I leave this miserable place for my own
Ethel's side, long to remain!"

Villiers's letters varied little, but yet they got more desponding; and
Ethel grew very impatient to see him again. She had counted the days of
her week--they were fulfilled, and her husband did not return. Every
thing depended, he said, on his presence; and he must remain yet for
another day or two. At first he implored her to be patient. He besought
her, as she loved him, to endure their separation yet for a few more
days. His letters were very short, but all in this style. They were
imperative with his wife--she obeyed; yet she did so, she told him,
against her will and against her sense of right. She ought to be at his
side to cheer him under his difficulties. She had married him because
she loved him, and because the first and only wish of her heart was to
conduce to his happiness. To travel together, to enjoy society and the
beauties of nature in each other's society, were indeed blessings, and
she valued them; but there was another dearer still, of which she felt
herself defrauded, and for which she yearned. "The aim of my life, and
its only real joy," she said, "is to make your existence happier than it
would have been without me. When I know and feel that such a moment or
hour has been passed by you with sensations of pleasure, and that
through me, I have fulfilled the purpose of my destiny. Deprived of the
opportunity to accomplish this, I am bereft of that for which I breathe.
You speak as if I were better off here than if I shared the
inconveniences of your lot--is not this strange language, my own Edward?
You talk of security and comfort; where can I be so secure as near you?
And for comfort! what heart-elevating joy it would be to exchange this
barren, meagre scene of absence, for the delight, the comfort of seeing
you, of waiting on you! I do not ask you to hasten your return, so as to
injure your prospects, but permit me to join you. Would not London
itself, dismal as you describe it, become sunny and glad, if Ethel were
with you?"

To these adjurations Villiers scarcely replied. Time crept on; three
weeks had already elapsed. Now and then a day intervened, and he did not
write, and his wife's anxiety grew to an intolerable pitch. She did not
for an instant suspect his faith, but she feared that he must be utterly
miserable, since he shrunk from communicating his feelings to her. His
last letter was brief; "I have just come from my solicitor," he said,
"and have but time to say, that I must go there again to-morrow, so I
shall not be with you. O the heavy hours in this dark prison! You will
reward me and make me forget them when I see you--but how shall I pass
the time till then!"

These words made Ethel conceive the idea of joining him in town. He
would not, he could not be angry? He could not bring his mind to ask her
to share his discomforts--but ought she not to volunteer--to insist upon
his permitting her to come? Permit! the same pride that prevented his
asking, would induce him to refuse her request; but should she do wrong,
if, without his express permission, she were to join him? A thrill, half
fear, half transport, made her heart's blood stand still at the thought.
The day after this last, she got no letter; the following day was
Monday, and there would be no post from town. Her resolution was taken,
and she told her aunt, that she should go up to London the following
day. Mrs. Elizabeth knew little of the actual circumstances of the young
pair. Villiers had made it an express condition, that she should not be
informed of their difficulties, for he was resolute not to take from her
little store, which, in the way she lived, was sufficient, yet barely
so, for her wants. She did not question her niece as to her journey; she
imagined that it was a thing arranged. But Ethel herself was full of
perplexity; she remembered what Villiers had said of expense; she knew
that he would be deeply hurt if she used a public conveyance, and yet to
go post would consume the little money she had left, and she did not
like to reach London pennyless. She began to talk to her aunt, and
faltered out something about want of money for posting--the good lady's
purse was instantly in her hand. Ethel had not the same horror as her
husband of pecuniary obligation--she was too inexperienced to know its
annoyances; and in the present instance, to receive a small sum from her
aunt, appeared to her an affair that did not merit hesitation. She took
twenty pounds for her journey, and felt her heart lighter. There yet
remained another question. Hitherto they had travelled in their own
carriage, with a valet and lady's maid. Villiers had taken his servant
to town with him. In a postscript to one of his letters, he said, "I was
able to recommend Laurie to a good place, so I have parted with him, and
I shall not take another servant at this moment." Laurie had been long
and faithfully attached to her husband, who had never lived without an
attendant, and who, from his careless habits, was peculiarly helpless.
Ethel felt that this dismissal was a measure of economy, and that she
ought to imitate it. Still as any measure to be taken always frightened
her, she had not courage to discharge her maid, but resolved to go up to
town without her. Aunt Bessy was shocked at her going alone, but Ethel
was firm; nothing could happen to her, and she should prove to Edward
her readiness to endure privation.

On Monday, at eleven in the forenoon, on the 28th of November, Ethel,
having put together but a few things,--for she expected a speedy
return,--stept into her travelling chariot, and began her journey to
town. She was all delight at the idea of seeing Edward. She reproached
herself for having so long delayed giving this proof of her earnest
affection. She listened with beaming smiles to all her aunt's
injunctions and cautions: and, the carriage once in motion, drawing her
shawl round her, as she sat in the corner, looking on the despoiled yet
clear prospect, her mind was filled with the most agreeable
reveries--her heart soothed by the dearest anticipations.

To pay the post-horses--to gift the postillion herself, were all events
for her: she felt proud. "Edward said, I must begin to learn the ways of
the world; and this is my first lesson in economy and care," she
thought, as she put into the post-boy's hand just double the sum he had
ever received before. "And how good, and attentive, and willing every
body is! I am sure women can very well travel alone. Every one is
respectful, and desirous to serve," was her next internal remark, as she
undrew her little silken purse, to give a waiter half-a-crown, who had
brought her a glass of water, and whose extreme alacrity struck her as
so very kind-hearted.

Her spirits flagged as the day advanced. In spite of herself, an uneasy
feeling diffused itself through her mind, when, the sun going down, a
misty, chilly twilight crept over the landscape. Had she done right? she
asked herself; would Edward indeed be glad to see her? She felt half
frightened at her temerity--alarmed at the length of her journey--timid
when she thought of the vast London she was about to enter, without any
certain bourn. She supposed that Villiers went each day to his club, and
she knew that he lodged in Duke street, St. James's; but she was
ignorant of the number of the house, and the street itself was unknown
to her; she did not remember ever to have been in it in her life.

Her carriage entered labyrinthine London by Blackwall, and threaded the
wilds of Lothbury. A dense and ever-thickening mist, palpable, yellow,
and impervious to the eye, enveloped the whole town. Ethel had heard of
a November fog; but she had never witnessed one, and the idea of it did
not occur to her memory: she was half-frightened, thinking that some
strange phænomena were going on, and fancying that her postillion was
hurrying forward in terror. At last, in Cheapside, they stopped jammed
up by carts and coaches; and then she contrived to make herself heard,
asking what was the matter? The word "eclipse" hung upon her lips.

"Only, ma'am, the street has got blocked up like in the fog: we shall
get on presently."

The word "fog" solved the mystery; and again her thoughts were with
Villiers. What a horrible place for him to live in! And he had been
enduring all this wretchedness, while she was breathing the pure
atmosphere of the country. Again they proceeded through the "murky air,"
and through an infinitude of mischances;--the noise--the hubbub--the
crowd, as she could distinguish it, as if veiled by dirty gauze, by the
lights in the shops--all agitated and vexed her. Through Fleet Street
and the Strand they went; and it seemed as if their progress would never
come to an end. The whole previous journey from Longfield was short in
comparison to this tedious procession: twenty times she longed to get
out and walk. At last they got free, and with a quicker pace drove up to
the door of the Union Club, in Charing Cross.

The post-boy called one of the waiters to the carriage door; and Ethel
asked--"Is Mr. Villiers here?"

"Mr. Villiers, ma'am, has left town."

Ethel was aghast. She had watched assiduously along the road; yet she
had felt certain that if he had meant to come, she would have seen him
on Sunday; and till this moment, she had not entertained a real doubt
but that she should find him. She asked, falteringly, "When did he go?"

"Last week, ma'am: last Thursday, I think it was."

Ethel breathed again: the man's information must be false. She was too
inexperienced to be aware that servants and common people have a
singular tact in selecting the most unpleasant intelligence, and being
very alert in communicating it. "Do you know," she inquired, "where Mr.
Villiers lodges?"

"Can't say, indeed, ma'am; but the porter knows;--here, Saunders!"

No Saunders answered. "The porter is not in the way; but if you can
wait, ma'am, he'll be back presently."

The waiter disappeared: the post-boy came up--he touched his hat.
"Wait," said Ethel;--"we must wait a little;" and he removed himself to
the horses' heads. Ethel sat in her lonely corner, shrouded by fog and
darkness, watching every face as it passed under the lamp near, fancying
that Edward might appear among them. The ugly faces that haunt, in quick
succession, the imagination of one oppressed by night-mare, might vie
with those that passed successively in review before Ethel. Most of them
hurried on, looking neither to the right nor left. Some entered the
house; some glanced at her carriage: one or two, perceiving a bonnet,
evidently questioned the waiter. He stood there for her own service,
Ethel thought; and she watched his every movement--his successive
disappearances and returns--the people he talked to. Once she signed to
him to come; but--"No, ma'am, the porter is not come back yet,"--was all
his answer. At last, after having stood, half whistling, for some five
minutes, (it appeared to Ethel half-an-hour,) without having received
any visible communication, he suddenly came up to the carriage door,
saying, "The porter could not stay to speak to you, ma'am, he was in
such a hurry. He says, Mr. Villiers lodges in Duke Street, St. James's:
he should know the house, but has forgotten the number."

"Then I must wait till he comes back again. I knew all that before. Will
he be long?"

"A long time, ma'am; two hours at least. He said that the woman of the
house is a widow woman--Mrs. Derham."

Thus, as if by torture, (but, as with the whipping boys of old, her's
was the torture, not the delinquent's,) Ethel extracted some information
from the stupid, conceited fellow. On she went to Duke Street, to
discover Mrs. Derham's residence. A few wrong doors were knocked at; and
a beer-boy, at last, was the Mercury that brought the impatient, longing
wife, to the threshold of her husband's residence. Happy beer-boy! She
gave him a sovereign: he had never been so rich in his life
before;--such chance-medleys do occur in this strange world!




CHAPTER XVI


O my reviving joy! thy quickening presence
Makes the sad night
Sit like a youthful spring upon my blood.
I cannot make thy welcome rich enough
With all the wealth of words.

MIDDLETON.


The boy knocked at the door. A servant-girl opened it. "Does Mr.
Villiers lodge here?" asked the postillion, from his horse.

"Yes," said the girl.

"Open the door quickly, and let me out!" cried Ethel, as her heart beat
fast and loud.

The door was opened--the steps let down--operations tedious beyond
measures, as she thought. She got out, and was in the hall, going up
stairs.

"Mr. Villiers is not at home," said the maid.

Through the low blinds of the parlour window, Mrs. Derham had been
watching what was going on. She heard what her servant said, and now
came out. "Mr. Villiers is not at home," she reiterated; "will you leave
any message?"

"No; I will wait for him. Show me into his room."

"I am afraid that it is locked," answered Mrs. Derham repulsively:
"perhaps you can call again. Who shall I say asked for him?"

"O no!" cried Ethel, "I must wait for him. Will you permit me to wait in
your parlour? I am Mrs. Villiers."

"I beg pardon," said the good woman; "Mrs. Villiers is in the country."

"And so I am," replied Ethel--"at least, so I was this morning. Don't
you see my travelling carriage?--look; you may be sure that I am Mrs.
Villiers."

She took out of her little bag one of Edward's letters, with the perusal
of which she had beguiled much of her way to town. Mrs. Derham looked at
the direction--"The Honourable Mrs. Villiers;"--her countenance
brightened. Mrs. Derham was a little, plump, well-preserved woman of
fifty-four or five. She was kind-hearted, and of course shared the
worship for rank which possesses every heart born within the four seas.
She was now all attention. Villiers's room was open; he was expected
very soon:--"He is so seldom out in an evening: it is very unlucky; but
he must be back directly," said Mrs. Derham, as she showed the way up
the narrow staircase. Ethel reached the landing, and entered a room of
tolerable dimensions, considerably encumbered with litter, which opened
into a smaller room, with a tent bed. A little bit of fire glimmered in
the grate. The whole place looked excessively forlorn and comfortless.

Mrs. Derham bustled about to bestow a little neatness on the room,
saying something of the "untidiness of gentlemen," and "so many lodgers
in the house." Ethel sat down she longed to be alone. There was the
post-boy to be paid, and to be ordered to take the carriage to a
coach-house; and then--Mrs. Derham asked her if she would not have
something to eat: she herself was at tea, and offered a cup, which Ethel
thankfully accepted, acknowledging that she had not eaten since the
morning. Mrs. Derham was shocked. The rank, beauty, and sweet manners of
Ethel had made a conquest, which her extreme youth redoubled. "So young
a lady," she said, "to go about alone: she did not know how to take care
of herself, she was sure. She must have some supper: a roast chicken
should be ready in an hour--by the time Mr. Villiers came in."

"But the tea," said Ethel, smiling; "you will let me have that now?"

Mrs. Derham hurried away on this hint, and the young wife was left
alone. She had been married a year; but there was still a freshness
about her feelings, which gave zest to every change in her wedded life.
"This is where he has been living without me," she thought; "Poor
Edward! it does not look as if he were very comfortable."

She rose from her seat, and began to arrange the books and papers. A
glove of her husband's lay on the table: she kissed it with a glad
feeling of welcome. When the servant came in, she had the fire
replenished--the hearth swept; and in a minute or two, the room had lost
much of its disconsolate appearance. Then, with a continuation of her
feminine love of order she arranged her own dress and hair; giving to
her attire, as much as possible, an at-home appearance. She had just
finished--just sat down, and begun to find the time long--when a quick,
imperative knock at the door, which she recognized at once, made her
heart beat, and her cheek grow pale. She heard a step--a voice--and Mrs.
Derham answer--"Yes, sir; the fire is in--every thing comfortable;"--and
Ethel opened the door, as she spoke, and in an instant was clasped in
her husband's arms.

It was not a moment whose joy could be expressed by words. He had been
miserable during her absence, and had thought of sending for her; but he
looked round his single room, remembered that he was in lodgings, and
gave up his purpose with a bitter murmur: and here she was, uncalled
for, but most welcome: she was here, in her youth, her loveliness, her
sweetness: these were charms; but others more transcendent now attended
on, and invested her;--the sacred tenderness of a wife had led her to
his side; and love, in its most genuine and beautiful shape, shed an
atmosphere of delight and worship about her. Not one circumstance could
alloy the unspeakable bliss of their meeting. Poverty, and its
humiliations, vanished from before the eyes of Villiers; he was
overflowingly rich in the possession of her affections--her presence.
Again and again he thanked her, in broken accents of expressive
transport.

"Nothing in the whole world could make me unhappy now!" he cried; and
Ethel, who had seen his face look elongated and gloomy at the moment he
had entered, felt indeed that Medea, with all her potent herbs, was less
of a magician than she, in the power of infusing the sparkling spirit of
life into one human frame. It was long before either were coherent in
their inquiries and replies. There was nothing, indeed, that either
wished to know. Life, and its purposes, were fulfilled, rounded,
complete, without a flaw. They loved, and were together--together, not
for a transitory moment, but for the whole duration of the eternity of
love, which never could be exhausted in their hearts.

After more than an hour spent in gradually becoming acquainted and
familiar with the transporting change, from separate loneliness to
mutual society and sympathy, the good-natured face of Mrs. Derham showed
itself, to announce that Ethel's supper was ready. These words brought
back to Edward's recollection his wife's journey, and consequent
fatigues: he grew more desirous than Mrs. Derham to feed his poor
famished bird, whose eyes, in spite of the joy that shone in them, began
to look languid, and whose cheek was pale. The little supper-table was
laid, and they sat down together.

Lady Mary Wortley Montagu has recorded the pleasure to be reaped


"When we meet with champagne and a chicken at last;"


and perhaps social life
contains no combination so full of enjoyment as a tête-à-tête supper.
_Here_ it was, with its highest zest. They feared no prying eyes--they
knew no ill: it was not a scanty hour of joy snatched from an age of
pain--a single spark illuminating a long blank night. It came after
separation, and possessed, therefore, the charm of novelty; but it was
the prelude to a long reunion--the seal set on their being once again
joined, to go through together each hour of the livelong day. Full of
unutterable thankfulness and gladness, as were the minds of each, there
was, besides,


"A sacred and home-felt delight,
A sober certainty of waking bliss,"


which is the crown and fulfilment of perfect human
happiness. "Imparadised" by each other's presence--no doubt--no fear of
division on the morrow-no dread of untoward event, suspicion, or blame,
clouded the balmy atmosphere which their hearts created around them. No.
Eden was required to enhance their happiness; there needed no


"Crisped brooks,
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold;"--


no


"Happy, rural seat, with various view,"


decked with


"Flowers of all hue,"
"All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;"--


nor "cool recess," nor



"Vernal airs,
Breathing the smell of field and grove."


In their narrow
abode--their nook of a room, cut off from the world, redolent only of
smoke and fog--their two fond hearts could build up bowers of delight,
and store them with all of ecstasy which the soul of man can know,
without any assistance of eye, or ear, or scent. So rich, and prodigal,
and glorious, in its gifts, is faithful and true-hearted love,--when it
knows the sacrifices which it must make to merit them, and consents
willingly to forego vanity, selfishness, and the exactions of self-will,
in unlimited and unregretted exchange.

Mutual esteem and gratitude sanctified the unreserved sympathy which
made each so happy in the other. Did they love the less for not loving
"in sin and fear?" Far from it. The certainty of being the cause of good
to each other tended to foster the most delicate of all passions, more
than the rougher ministrations of terror, and a knowledge that each was
the occasion of injury to the other. A woman's heart is peculiarly
unfitted to sustain this conflict. Her sensibility gives keenness to her
imagination, and she magnifies every peril, and writhes beneath every
sacrifice which tends to humiliate her in her own eyes. The natural
pride of her sex struggles with her desire to confer happiness, and her
peace is wrecked.

Far different was the happy Ethel's situation--far otherwise were her
thoughts employed than in concealing the pangs of care and shame. The
sense of right adorned the devotion of love. She read approbation in
Edward's eyes, and drew near him in full consciousness of deserving it.
They sat at their supper, and long after, by the cheerful fire, talking
of a thousand things connected with the present and the future--the
long, long future which they were to spend together; and every now and
then their eyes sparkled with the gladness of renewed delight in seeing
each other. "Mine, my own, for ever!"--And was this exultation in
possession to be termed selfish? by no other reasoning surely, than that
used by a cold and meaningless philosophy, which gives this name to
generosity and truth, and all the nobler passions of the soul. They
congratulated themselves on this mutual property, partly because it had
been a free gift one to the other; partly because they looked forward to
the right it ensured to each, of conferring mutual benefits; and partly
through the instinctive love God has implanted for that which, being
ours, is become the better part of ourselves. They were united for
"better and worse," and there was a sacredness in the thought of the
"worse" they might share, which gave a mysterious and celestial charm to
the present "better."




CHAPTER XVII


Do you not think yourself truly happy?
You have the abstract of all sweetness by you,
The precious wealth youth labours to arrive at,
Nor is she less in honour than in beauty.

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


The following day was one of pouring, unintermitting rain. Villiers and
Ethel drew their chairs near their cheerful fire, and were happy. Edward
could not quite conquer his repugnance to seeing his wife in lodgings,
and in those also of so mean and narrow a description. But the spirit of
Ethel was more disencumbered of earthly particles: that had found its
rest in the very home of Love. The rosy light of the divinity invested
all things for her. Cleopatra on the Cydnus, in the bark which--


"Like a burnished throne
Burnt on the water,"


borne along


"By purple sails . . .
. . . So perfumed, that
The winds were love-sick with them;"


was not more
gorgeously attended than Ethel was to her own fancy, lapped and cradled
in all that love has of tender, voluptuous, and confiding.

Several days past before Villiers could withdraw her from this blissful
dream, to gaze upon the world as it was. He could not make her disgusted
with her fortunes nor her abode, but he awakened anxiety on his own
account. His father, as he had conjectured, was gone to Paris, leaving
merely a message for his son, that he would willingly join him in any
act for raising money, by mortgage or the absolute disposal of a part of
the estate. Edward had consulted with his solicitor, who was to look
over a vast variety of papers, to discover the most eligible mode of
making some kind of sale. Delay, in all its various shapes, waited on
these arrangements; and Villiers was very averse to leaving town till he
held some clue to the labyrinth of obstacles which presented themselves
at every turn. He talked of their taking a house in town; but Ethel
would not hear of such extravagance. In the first place, their actual
means were at a very low ebb, with little hope of a speedy supply. There
was another circumstance, the annoyance of which he understood far
better than Ethel could. He had raised money on annuities, the interest
of which he was totally unable to pay; this exposed him to a personal
risk of the most disagreeable kind, and he knew that his chief creditor
was on the point of resorting to harsh measures against him. These
things, dingy-visaged, dirty-handed realities as they were, made a
strange contrast with Ethel's feeling of serene and elevated bliss; but
she, with unshrinking heart, brought the same fortitude and love into
the crooked and sordid ways of modern London, which had adorned heroines
of old, as they wandered amidst trackless forests, and over barren
mountains.

Several days passed, and the weather became clear, though cold. The
young pair walked together in the parks at such morning hours as would
prevent their meeting any acquaintances, for Edward was desirous that it
should not be known that they were in town. Villiers also traced his
daily, weary, disappointing way to his solicitor, where he found things
look more blank and dismal each day. Then when evening came, and the
curtains were drawn, they might have been at the top of Mount Caucasus,
instead of in the centre of London, so completely were they cut off from
every thing except each other. They then felt absolutely happy: the
lingering disgusts of Edward were washed clean away by the bounteous,
everspringing love, that flowed, as waters from a fountain, from the
heart of Ethel, in one perpetual tide.

In those hours of unchecked talk, she learned many things she had not
known before--the love of Horatio Saville for Lady Lodore was revealed to
her; but the story was not truly told, for the prejudices as well as the
ignorance of Villiers rendered him blind to the sincerity of Cornelia's
affection and regret. Ethel wondered, and in spite of the charm with
which she delighted to invest the image of her mother, she could not
help agreeing with her husband that she must be irrevocably wedded to
the most despicable worldly feelings, so to have played with the heart
of a man such as Horatio: a man, whose simplest word bore the stamp of
truth and genius; one of those elected few whom nature elevats to her
own high list of nobility and greatness. How could she, a simple girl,
interest feelings which were not alive to Saville's merits? She could
only hope that in some dazzling marriage Lady Lodore would find a
compensation for the higher destiny which might have been hers, but
that, like the "base Indian," she had thrown


"A pearl away,
Richer than all his tribe."


There was a peaceful quiet in their secluded and obscure life, which
somewhat resembled the hours spent on board ship, when you long for, yet
fear, the conclusion of the voyage, and shrink involuntarily from
exchanging a state, whose chief blessing is an absence of every care,
for the variety of pains and pleasures which chequer life. Ethel
possessed her all--so near, so undivided, so entirely her own, that she
could not enter into Villiers's impatience, nor quite sympathize with
the disquietude he could not repress. After considerable delays, his
solicitor informed him that his father had so entirely disposed of all
his interest in the property, that his readiness to join in any act of
sale would be useless. The next thing to be done was for Edward to sell
a part of his expectations, and the lawyer promised to find a purchaser,
and begged to see him three days hence, when no doubt he should have
some proposal to communicate.

Whoever has known what such things are--whoever has waited on the demurs
and objections, and suffered the alternations of total failure and
suddenly renewed hopes, which are the Tantalus-food held to the lips of
those under the circumstances of Villiers, can follow in imagination his
various conferences with his solicitor, as day after day something new
was discovered, still to drag on, or to impede, the tortoise pace of his
negociations. It will be no matter of wonder to such, that a month
instead of three days wasted away, and found him precisely in the same
position, with hopes a little raised, though so frequently blasted, and
nothing done.

In recording the annoyances, or rather the adversity which the young
pair endured at this period, a risk is run, on the one hand, of being
censured for bringing the reader into contact with degrading and sordid
miseries; and on the other, of laying too much stress on circumstances
which will appear to those in a lower sphere of life, as scarcely
deserving the name of misfortune. It is very easy to embark on the wild
ocean of romance, and to steer a danger-fraught passage, amidst giant
perils,--the very words employed, excite the imagination, and give grace
to the narrative. But all beautiful and fairylike as was Ethel Villiers,
in tracing her fortunes, it is necessary to descend from such altitudes,
to employ terms of vulgar use, and to describe scenes of common-place
and debasing interest; so that, if she herself, in her youth and
feminine tenderness, does not shed light and holiness around her, we
shall grope darkling, and fail utterly in the scope which we proposed to
ourselves in selecting her history for the entertainment of the reader.




CHAPTER XVIII


I saw her upon nearer view,
A Spirit, yet a Woman too!
A Creature not too bright or good
For human nature's daily food;
For transient sorrows, simple wiles,
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.

WORDSWORTH.


The end of December had come. New year's day found and left them still
in Duke Street. On the 4th of January Villiers received a letter from
his uncle, Lord Maristow, entrusting a commission to him, which obliged
him to go to the neighbourhood of Egham. Not having a horse, he went by
the stage. He set out so late in the day that there was no chance of his
returning the same night; and he promised to be back early on the
morrow. Ethel had letters to write to Italy and to her aunt; and with
these she tried to beguile the time. She felt lonely; the absence of
Villiers for so many hours engendered an anxiety, which she found some
difficulty in repressing. Accustomed to have him perpetually at her
side, and without any other companion or resource, she repined at her
solitude. There was his empty chair, and no hope that he would occupy
it; and she sat in her little room so near to thousands, and yet so cut
off from every one, with such a sense of desolation as Mungo Park might
have felt in central Africa, or a shipwrecked mariner on an uninhabited
island.

Her pen was taken up, but she did not write. She could not command her
thoughts to express any thing but the overflowing, devoted,
all-engrossing affection of her heart, her adoration for her husband;
that would not amuse Lucy,--she thought: and she had commenced another
sheet with "My dearest Aunt," when the maid-servant ushered a man into
her presence--a stranger, a working man. What could he want with her? He
seemed confused, and stammered out, "Mr. Villiers is not in?"

"He will be at home to-morrow, if you want him; or have you any message
that I can give?"

"You are Mrs. Villiers, ma'am?"

"Yes, my good man, I am Mrs. Villiers."

"If you please, ma'am, I am Saunders, one of the porters at the Union
Club."

"I remember: has any message come there? or does Mr. Villiers owe you
any money?" and her purse was in her hand.

"O no, ma'am. Mr. Villiers is a good gentleman; and he has been petiklar
generous to me--and that is why I come, because I am afraid," continued
the man, lowering his tone, "that he is in danger."

"Good heavens! Where? how?" cried Ethel, starting from her chair. "Tell
me at once."

"Yes, ma'am, I will; so you must know that this evening--"

"Yes, this evening. What has happened? he left me at six o'clock--what
is it?"

"Nothing, I hope, this evening, ma'am. I am only afraid for to-morrow
morning. And I will tell you all I know, as quick as ever I can."

The man then proceeded to relate, that some one had been inquiring about
Mr. Villiers at the Club House. One of the servants had told him that he
lived in Duke Street, St. James's, and that was all he knew; but
Saunders came up, and the man questioned him. He instantly recognized
the fellow, and knew what his business must be. And he tried to deceive
him, and declared that Mr. Villiers was gone out of town; but the fellow
said that he knew better than that; and that he had been seen that very
day in the Strand. He should look for him, no thanks to Saunders, in
Duke Street. "And so, ma'am, you see they'll be sure to be here early
to-morrow morning. So don't let Mr. Villiers stay here, on no account
whatsomever."

"Why?" asked Ethel, simply; "they can't hurt him."

"I am sure, ma'am," said Saunders, his face brightening, "I am very glad
to hear that--you know best. They will arrest him for sure, but--"

"Arrest him!"

"Yes, ma'am, for I've seen the tall one before. There were two of
them--bailiffs."

Ethel now began to tremble violently; these were strange, cabalistic
words to her, the more awful from their mystery. "What am I to do?" she
exclaimed; "Mr. Villiers will be here in the morning, he sleeps at
Egham, and will be here early; I must go to him directly."

"I am glad to hear he is so far," said Saunders; "and if I can be of any
use you have but to say it; shall I go to Egham? there are night coaches
that go through, and I might warn him."

Ethel thought--she feared to do any thing--she imagined that she should
be watched, that all her endeavours would be of no avail. She looked at
the man, honesty was written on his face; but there was no intelligence,
nothing to tell her that his advice was good. The possibility of such an
event as the present had never occurred to her. Villiers had been silent
with regard to his fears on this head. She was suddenly transported into
a strange sea, hemmed in by danger, without a pilot or knowledge of a
passage. Again she looked at the man's face: "What is best to be done!"
she exclaimed.

"I am sure, ma'am" he replied, as if she had asked him the question, "I
think what I said is best, if you will tell me where I can find Mr.
Villiers. I should think nothing of going, and he could send word by me
what he wished you to do."

"Yes, that would indeed be a comfort. I will write three lines, and you
shall take them." In a moment she had written. "Give this note into his
own hand, he will sleep there--I have written the direction of the
house--or at some inn, at Egham. Do not rest till you have given the
letter, and here is for your trouble." She held out two sovereigns.

"Depend on me, ma'am; and I will bring an answer to you by nine in the
morning. Mr. Villiers will pay me what he thinks fit--you may want your
money. Only, ma'am, don't be frightened when them men come to-morrow--if
the people here are good sort of folks, you had better give them a
hint--it may save you trouble."

"Thank you: you are a good man, and I will remember you, and reward you.
By nine to-morrow--you will be punctual?"

The man again assured her that he would use all diligence, and took his
leave.

Ethel felt totally overwhelmed by these tidings. The unknown is always
terrible, and the ideas of arrest, and prison, and bolts, and bars, and
straw, floated before her imagination. Was Villiers safe even where he
was? Would not the men make inquiries, learn where he had gone, and
follow him, even if it were to the end of the world? She had heard of
the activity employed to arrest criminals, and mingled every kind of
story in her head, till she grew desperate from terror. Not knowing what
else to do, she became eager for Mrs. Derham's advice, and hurried down
stairs to ask it.

She had not seen much of the good lady since her first arrival. Every
day, when Villiers went out, she came up, indeed, on the momentous
question of "orders for dinner;" and then she bestowed the benefit of
some five or ten minutes garrulity on her fair lodger. Ethel learnt that
she had seen better days, and that were justice done her, she ought to
be riding in her coach, instead of letting lodgings. She learnt that she
had a married daughter living at Kennington: poor enough, but struggling
on cheerfully with her mother's help. The best girl in the world she
was, and a jewel of a wife, and had two of the most beautiful children
that ever were beheld.

This was all that Ethel knew, except that once Mrs. Derham had brought
her one of her grandchildren to be seen and admired. In all that the
good woman said, there was so much kindness, such a cheerful endurance
of the ills of life, and she had shown such a readiness to oblige, that
the idea of applying to her for advice, relieved Ethel's mind of much of
its load of anxiety.

She was too much agitated to think of ringing for the servant, to ask to
see her; but hurried down stairs, and knocked at the parlour-door almost
before she was aware of what she was doing. "Come in," said a feminine
voice. Ethel entered, and started to see one she knew;--and yet again
she doubted;--was it indeed Fanny Derham whom she beheld?

The recognition afforded mutual pleasure: checked a little on Ethel's
part, by her anxieties; and on Fanny's, by a feeling that she had been
neglected by her friend. A few letters had passed between them, when
first Ethel had visited Longfield: since then their correspondence had
been discontinued till after her return to England, from Italy, when
Mrs. Villiers had wrote; but her letter was returned by the post-office,
no such person being to be found according to the address.

The embarrassment of the moment passed away. Ethel forgot, or rather did
not advert to, her friend's lowly destiny, in the joy of meeting her
again. After a minute or two, also, they had become familiar with the
change that time had operated in their youthful appearance, which was
not much, and most in Ethel. Her marriage, and conversance with the
world, had changed her into a woman, and endowed her with easy manners
and self-possession. Fanny was still a mere girl; tall, beyond the
middle height, yet her young, ingenuous countenance was unaltered, as
well as that singular mixture of mildness and independence, in her
manners, which had always characterized her. Her light blue eyes beamed
with intelligence, and her smile expressed the complacency and
condescension of a superior being. Her beauty was all intellectual:
open, sincere, passionless, yet benignant, you approached her without
fear of encountering any of the baser qualities of human beings,--their
hypocrisy, or selfishness. Those who have seen the paintings of the
calm-visaged, blue-eyed deities of the frescos of Pompeii, may form an
idea of the serene beauty of Fanny Derham.

When Mrs. Villiers entered, she was reading earnestly--a large
dictionary open before her. The book on which she was intent was in
Greek characters. "You have not forgotten your old pursuits," said
Ethel, smiling.

"Say rather I am more wedded to them than ever," she replied; "since,
more than ever, I need them to give light and glory to a dingy world.
But you, dear Ethel, if so I may call you,--you looked anxious as you
entered: you wish to speak to my mother;--she is gone to Kennington, and
will not return to-night. Can I be of any use?"

Her mother! how strange! and Mrs. Derham, while she had dilated with
pride on her elder daughter, had never mentioned this pearl of price,
which was her's also.

"Alas! I fear not!" replied Ethel; "it is experience I need--experience
in things you can know nothing about, nor your mother either, probably;
yet she may have heard of such things, and know how to advise me."

Mrs. Villiers then explained the sources of her disquietude. Fanny
listened with looks of the kindest sympathy. "Even in such things," she
said, "I have had experience. Adversity and I are become very close
friends since I last saw you: we are intimate, and I know much good of
her; so she is grateful, and repays me by prolonging her stay. Be
composed: no ill will happen, I trust, to Mr. Villiers;--at least you
need not be afraid of his being pursued. It the man you have sent be
active and faithful, all will be well. I will see these troublesome
people to-morrow, when they come, and prevent your being annoyed. If
Saunders returns early, and brings tidings of Mr. Villiers, you will
know what his wishes are. You can do nothing more to-night; and there is
every probability that all will be well."

"Do you really think so?" cried Mrs. Villiers. "O that I had gone with
him!--never will I again let him go any where without me."

Fanny entered into more minute explanations, and succeeded, to a great
degree, in calming her friend. She accompanied her back to her own room,
and sat with her long. She entered into the details of her own
history:--the illness and death of her father; the insulting treatment
her mother had met from his family; the kindness of a relation of her
own, who had assisted them, and enabled them to pursue their present
mode of life, which procured them a livelihood. Fanny spoke generally of
these circumstances, and in a spirit that seemed to disdain that such
things were; not because they were degrading in the eyes of others, but
because they interfered with the philosophic leisure, and enjoyment of
nature, which she so dearly prized. She thought nothing of privation, or
the world's impertinence; but much of being immured in the midst of
London, and being forced to consider the inglorious necessities of life.
Her desire to be useful to her mother induced her often to spend
precious time in "making the best of things," which she would readily
have dispensed with altogether, as the easiest, as well as the wisest,
way of freeing herself from their trammels. Her narration interested
Ethel, and served to calm her mind. She thought--"Can I not bear those
cares with equanimity for Edward's sake, which Fanny regards as so
trivial, merely because Plato and Epictetus bid her do so? Will not the
good God, who has implanted in her heart so cheerless a consolation,
bring comfort to mine, which has no sorrow but for another's sake?"

These reflections tranquillized her, when she laid her head on her
pillow at night. She resigned her being and destiny to a Power superior
to any earthly authority, with a conviction, that its most benign
influence would be extended over her.




END OF VOL. II.


CHAPTER I


If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
For then, despite of space, I would be brought,
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.

SHAKSPEARE.


The still hours of darkness passed silently away, and morning dawned,
when


All rose to do the task, he set to each
Who shaped us to his ends, and not our own.


Ethel had slept peacefully through the livelong night;
nor woke till a knock at her door roused her. A rush of fear--a sense of
ill, made her heart palpitate as she opened her eyes to the light of
day. While she was striving to recall her thoughts, and to remember what
the evil was with which she was threatened, again the servant tapped at
her door, to say that Saunders had returned, and to deliver the letter
he had brought. She looked at her watch: it was past ten o'clock. She
felt glad that it had grown so late, and she not disturbed: yet as she
took the letter brought to her from her husband, all her tremor
returned; and she read it with agitation, as if it contained the
announcement of her final doom.


"You send me disagreeable tidings, my sweet Ethel," wrote Villiers,--"I
hope unfounded; but caution is necessary: I shall not, therefore, come
to Duke Street. Send me a few lines, by Saunders, to tell me if any
thing has happened. If what he apprehended has really taken place, you
must bear, my love, the separation of a day. You do not understand these
things, and will wonder when I tell you, that when the clock strikes
twelve on Saturday night, the magic spells and potent charms of
Saunders's friends cease to have power: at that hour I shall be restored
to you. Wait till then--and _then_ we will consult for the future. Have
patience, dearest love: you have wedded poverty, hardship, and
annoyance; but, joined to these, is the fondest, the most faithful heart
in the world;--a heart you deign to prize, so I will not repine at ill
fortune. Adieu, till this evening;--and then, as Belvidera says,
'Remember twelve!'

"_Saturday Morning._"


After reading these lines, Ethel dressed herself hastily. Fanny Derham
had already asked permission to see her; and she found her waiting in
her sitting-room. It was an unspeakable comfort to have one as
intelligent and kind as Fanny, to communicate with, during Edward's
absence. The soft, pleading eyes of Ethel asked her for comfort and
counsel; and, in spite of her extreme youth, the benignant and
intelligent expression of Fanny's countenance promised both.

"I am sorry to say," she said, "that Saunders's prognostics are too
true. Such men as he describes have been here this morning. They were
tolerably civil, and I convinced them, with greater ease than I had
hoped, that Mr. Villiers was absent from the house; and I assured them,
that after this visit of theirs, he was not likely to return."

"And do you really believe that they were"--Ethel faltered.

"Bailiffs? Assuredly," replied Fanny: "they told me that they had the
power to search the house; but if they were 'strong,' they were also
'merciful.' And now, what do you do? Saunders tells me he is waiting to
take back a letter to Mr. Villiers, at the London Coffee House. Write
quickly, while I make your breakfast."

Ethel gladly obeyed. She wrote a few words to her husband. That it was
already Saturday, cheered her: twelve at night would soon come.

After her note was dispatched, she addressed Fanny. "What trouble I
give," she said: "what will your mother think of such degrading
proceedings?"

"My mother," said Fanny, "is the kindest-hearted woman in the world. We
have never exactly suffered this disaster; but we are in a rank of life
which causes us to be brought into contact with such among our friends
and relations; and she is familiar with trouble in almost all shapes.
You are a great favourite of hers; and now that she can claim a sort of
acquaintance, she will be heart and soul your friend."

"It is odd," observed Ethel, "that she never mentioned you to me. Had
the name of Fanny been mentioned, I should have recollected who Mrs.
Derham was."

"Perhaps not," said Fanny; "it would have required a great effort of the
imagination to have fancied Mrs. Derham the wife of my father. You never
knew him; but Lord Lodore made you familiar with his qualities: the most
shrinking susceptibility to the world's scorn, joined to the most entire
abstraction from all that is vulgar; a morbid sensibility and delicate
health placed him in glaring contrast with my mother. They never in the
least assimilated; and her character has gained in excellence since his
loss. Before she was fretted and galled by his finer feelings--now she
can be good in her own way. Nothing reminds her of his exalted
sentiments, except myself; and she is willing enough to forget me."

"And you do not repine?" asked her friend.

"I do not: she is happy in and with Sarah. I should spoil their notions
of comfort, did I mingle with them;--they would torture and destroy me,
did they interfere with me. I lost my guide, preserver, my guardian
angel, when my father died. Nothing remains but the philosophy which he
taught me--the disdain of low-thoughted care which he sedulously
cultivated: this, joined to my cherished independence, which my
disposition renders necessary to me."

"And thus you foster sorrow, and waste your life in vain regrets?"

"Pardon me! I do not waste my life," replied Fanny, with her sunny
smile;--"nor am I unhappy--far otherwise. An ardent thirst for
knowledge, is as the air I breathe; and the acquisition of it, is pure
and unalloyed happiness. I aspire to be useful to my fellow-creatures:
but that is a consideration for the future, when fortune shall smile on
me; now I have but one passion; it swallows up every other; it dwells
with my darling books, and is fed by the treasures of beauty and wisdom
which they contain."

Ethel could not understand. Fanny continued:--"I aspire to be
useful;--sometimes I think I am--once I know I was. I was my father's
almoner.

"We lived in a district where there was a great deal of distress, and a
great deal of oppression. We had no money to give, but I soon found that
determination and earnestness will do much. It was my father's lesson,
that I should never fear any thing but myself. He taught me to
penetrate, to anatomize, to purify my motives; but once assured of my
own integrity, to be afraid of nothing. Words have more power than any
one can guess; it is by words that the world's great fight, now in these
civilized times, is carried on; I never hesitated to use them, when I
fought any battle for the miserable and oppressed. People are so afraid
to speak, it would seem as if half our fellow-creatures were born with
deficient organs; like parrots they can repeat a lesson, but their voice
fails them, when that alone is wanting to make the tyrant quail."

As Fanny spoke, her blue eyes brightened, and a smile irradiated her
face; these were all the tokens of enthusiasm she displayed, yet her
words moved Ethel strangely, and she looked on her with wonder as a
superior being. Her youth gave grace to her sentiments, and were an
assurance of their sincerity. She continued:--

"I am becoming flightly, as my mother calls it; but, as I spoke, many
scenes of cottage distress passed through my memory, when, holding my
father's hand, I witnessed his endeavours to relieve the poor. That is
all over now--he is gone, and I have but one consolation--that of
endeavouring to render myself worthy to rejoin him in a better world. It
is this hope that impels me continually and without any flagging of
spirit, to cultivate my understanding and to refine it. O what has this
life to give, as worldlings describe it, worth one of those glorious
emotions, which raise me from this petty sphere, into the sun-bright
regions of mind, which my father inhabits! I am rewarded even here by
the elevated feelings which the authors, whom I love so passionately,
inspire; while I converse each day with Plato, and Cicero, and
Epictetus, the world, as it is, passes from before me like a vain
shadow."

These enthusiastic words were spoken with so calm a manner, and in so
equable a voice, that there seemed nothing strange nor exaggerated in
them. It is vanity and affectation that shock, or any manifestation of
feeling not in accordance with the real character. But while we follow
our natural bent, and only speak that which our minds spontaneously
inspire, there is a harmony, which, however novel, is never grating.
Fanny Derham spoke of things, which, to use her own expression, were to
her as the air she breathed, and the simplicity of her manner entirely
obviated the wonder which the energy of her expressions might occasion.

Such a woman as Fanny was more made to be loved by her own sex than by
the opposite one. Superiority of intellect, joined to acquisitions
beyond those usual even to men; and both announced with frankness,
though without pretension, forms a kind of anomaly little in accord with
masculine taste. Fanny could not be the rival of women, and, therefore,
all her merits were appreciated by them. They love to look up to a
superior being, to rest on a firmer support than their own minds can
afford; and they are glad to find such in one of their own sex, and thus
destitute of those dangers which usually attend any services conferred
by men.

From talk like this, they diverged to subjects nearer to the heart of
Ethel. They spoke of Lord Lodore, and her father's name soothed her
agitation even more than the consolatory arguments of her friend. She
remembered how often he had talked of the trials to which the constancy of
her temper and the truth of her affection might be put, and she felt her
courage rise to encounter those now before her, without discontent, or
rather with that cheerful fortitude, which sheds grace over the rugged
form of adversity.




CHAPTER II


_Marian._ Could you so long be absent?
_Robin._ What a week?
Was that so long?
_Marian._ How long are lovers' weeks,
Do you think, Robin, when they are asunder?
Are they not pris'ners' years?

BEN JONSON.


The day passed on more lightly than Ethel could have hoped; much of it
indeed was gone before she opened her eyes to greet it. Night soon
closed in, and she busied herself with arrangements for the welcome of
her husband. Fanny loved solitude too well herself not to believe that
others shared her taste. She retired therefore when evening commenced.
No sooner was Ethel alone, than every image except Edward's passed out
of her mind. Her heart was bursting with affection. Every other idea and
thought, to use a chemical expression, was held in solution by that
powerful feeling, which mingled and united with every particle of her
soul. She could not write nor read; if she attempted, before she had
finished the shortest sentence, she found that her understanding was
wandering, and she re-read it with no better success. It was as if a
spring, a gush from the fountain of love poured itself in, bearing away
every object which she strove to throw upon the stream of thought, till
its own sweet waters alone filled the channel through which it flowed.
She gave herself up to the bewildering influence, and almost forgot to
count the hours till Edward's expected arrival. At last it was ten
o'clock, and then the sting of impatience and uncertainty was felt. It
appeared to her as if a whole age had passed since she had seen or heard
of him--as if countless events and incalculable changes might have taken
place. She read again and again his note, to assure herself that she
might really expect him: the minutes meanwhile stood still, or were told
heavily by the distinct beating of her heart. The east wind bore to her
ear the sound of the quarters of hours, as they chimed from various
churches. At length eleven, half-past eleven was passed, and the hand of
her watch began to climb slowly upwards toward the zenith, which she
desired so ardently that it should reach. She gazed on the dial-plate,
till she fancied that the pointers did not move; she placed her hands
before her eyes resolutely, and would not look for a long long time;
three minutes had not been travelled over when again she viewed it; she
tried to count her pulse, as a measurement of time; her trembling
fingers refused to press the fluttering artery. At length another
quarter of an hour elapsed, and then the succeeding one hurried on more
speedily. Clock after clock struck; they mingled their various tones, as
the hour of twelve was tolled throughout London. It seemed as if they
would never end. Silence came at last--a brief silence succeeded by a
firm quick step in the street below, and a knock at the door. "Is he not
too soon?" poor fearful Ethel asked herself. But no; and in a moment
after, he was with her, safe in her glad embrace.

Perhaps of the two, Villiers showed himself the most enraptured at this
meeting. He gazed on his sweet wife, followed every motion, and hung
upon her voice, with all the delight of an exile, restored to his
long-lost home. "What a transporting change," he said, "to find myself
with you--to see you in the same room with me--to know again that,
lovely and dear as you are, that you are mine--that I am again
myself--not the miserable dog that has been wandering about all day--a
body without a soul! For a few short hours, at least, Ethel will call me
hers."

"Indeed, indeed, love," she replied, "we will not be separated again."

"We will not even think about that tonight," said Villiers. "The future
is dark and blank, the present as radiant as your own sweet self can
make it."

On the following day--and the following day did come, in spite of
Ethel's wishes, which would have held back the progress of time: it came
and passed away; hour after hour stealing along, till it dwindled to a
mere point. On the following day, they consulted earnestly on what was
to be done. Villiers was greatly averse to Ethel's leaving her present
abode, where every one was so very kind and attentive to her, and he was
sanguine in his hopes of obtaining in the course of the week, just
commenced, a sum, sufficient to carry them to Paris or Brussels, were
they could remain till his affairs were finally arranged, and the
payment of his debts regulated in a way to satisfy his creditors. One
week of absence; Villiers used all his persuasion to induce Ethel to
submit to it. "Where you can be, I can be also," was her answer; and she
listened unconvinced to the detail of the inconveniences which Villiers
pointed out: at last he almost got angry. "I could call you unkind,
Ethel," he said, "not to yield to me."

"I will yield to you," said Ethel, "but you are wrong to ask me."

"Never mind that," replied her husband, "do concede this point, dearest;
if not because it is best that you should, then because I wish it, and
ask it of you. You say that your first desire is to make me happy, and
you pain me exceedingly by your--I had almost said perverseness."

Thus, not convinced, but obedient, Ethel agreed to allow him to depart
alone. She bargained that she should be permitted to come each day in a
hackney coach to a place where he might meet her, and they could spend
an hour or two together. Edward did not like this plan at all, but there
was no remedy. "You are at least resolved," he said, "to spur my
endeavours; I will not rest day or night, till I am enabled to get away
from this vast dungeon."

The hours stole on. Even Edward's buoyant spirits could not bear up
against the sadness of watching the fleeting moments till the one should
come, which must separate him from his wife. "This nice, dear room," he
said, "I am sure I beg its pardon for having despised it so much
formerly--it is not as lofty as a church, nor as grand as a palace, but
it is very snug; and now you are in it, I discern even elegance in its
exceedingly queer tables and chairs. When our carriage broke down on the
Apennines, how glad we should have been if a room like this had risen,
'like an exhalation' for our shelter! Do you remember the barn of a
place we got into there, and our droll bed of the leaves of Indian corn,
which crackled all night long, and awoke us twenty times with the fear
of robbers? Then, indeed, twelve o'clock was not to separate us!"

As he said this he sighed; the hour of eleven was indicated by Ethel's
watch, and still he lingered; but she grew frightened for him, and
forced him to go away, while he besought the delay of but a few minutes.

Ethel exerted herself to endure as well as she could the separation of
the ensuing week. She was not of a repining disposition, yet she found
it very hard to bear. The discomfort to which Villiers was exposed
annoyed her, and the idea that she was not permitted to alleviate it
added to her painful feelings. In her prospect of life every evil was
neutralized when shared--now they were doubled, because the pain of
absence from each other was superadded. She did not yield to her
husband, in her opinion that this was wrong. She was willing to go
anywhere with him, and where he was, she also could be. There could be
no degradation in a wife waiting on the fallen fortunes of her husband.
No debasement can arise from any services dictated by love. It is
despicable to submit to hardship for unworthy and worldly objects, but
every thing that is suffered for the sake of affection, is hallowed by
the disinterested sentiment, and affords triumph and delight to the
willing victim. Sometimes she tried in speech or on paper to express
these feelings, and so by the force of irresistible reasoning to
persuade Edward to permit her to join him; but all argument was weak;
there was something beyond, that no words could express, which was
stronger than any reason in her heart. Who can express the power of
faithful and single-hearted love? As well attempt to define the laws of
life, which occasions a continuity of feeling from the brain to the
extremity of the frame, as try to explain how love can so unite two
souls, as to make each feel maimed and half alive, while divided. A
powerful impulse was perpetually urging Ethel to go--to place herself
near Villiers--to refuse to depart. It was with the most violent
struggles that she overcame the instigation.

She never could forget herself while away from him, or find the
slightest alleviation to her disquietude, except while conversing with
Fanny Derham, or rather while drawing her out, and listening to her, and
wondering at a mechanism of mind so different from her own. Each had
been the favourite daughter of men of superior qualities of mind. They
had been educated by their several fathers with the most sedulous care,
and nothing could be more opposite than the result, except that, indeed,
both made duty the master motive of their actions. Ethel had received,
so to speak, a sexual education. Lord Lodore had formed his ideal of what a
woman ought to be, of what he had wished to find his wife, and sought to
mould his daughter accordingly. Mr. Derham contemplated the duties and
objects befitting an immortal soul, and had educated his child for the
performance of them. The one fashioned his offspring to be the wife of a
frail human being, and instructed her to be yielding, and to make it her
duty to devote herself to his happiness, and to obey his will. The other
sought to guard his from all weakness, to make her complete in herself,
and to render her independent and self-sufficing. Born to poverty as
Fanny was, it was thus only that she could find happiness in rising
above her sphere; and, besides, a sense of pride, surviving his sense of
injury, caused him to wish that his child should set her heart on higher
things, than the distinctions and advantages of riches or rank; so that
if ever brought into collision with his own family, she could look down
with calm superiority on the "low ambition" of the wealthy. While Ethel
made it her happiness and duty to give herself away with unreserved
prodigality to him, whom she thought had every claim to her entire
devotion; Fanny zealously guarded her individuality, and would have
scorned herself could she have been brought to place the treasures of
her soul at the disposal of any power, except those moral laws which it
was her earnest endeavour never to transgress. Religion, reason, and
justice--these were the landmarks of her life. She was kind-hearted,
generous, and true--so also was Ethel; but the one was guided by the
tenderness of her heart, while the other consulted her understanding,
and would have died rather than have acted contrary to its dictates.

To guard Ethel from every contamination, Lord Lodore had secluded her from
all society, and forestalled every circumstance that might bring her into
conjunction with her fellow-creatures. He was equally careful to prevent
her fostering any pride, except that of sex; and never spoke to her as
if she were of an elevated rank: and the communication, however small,
which she necessarily had with the Americans, made such ideas foreign to
her mind. But she was excedingly shy; tremblingly alive to the slightest
repulse; and never perfectly fearless, (morally so, that is), except
when under the shelter of another's care. Fanny's first principle was,
that what she ought to do, that she could do, without hesitation or
regard for obstacles. She had something Quixotic in her nature; or
rather she would have had, if a clear head and some experience, even
young as she was, had not stood in the way of her making any glaring
mistakes; so that her enterprises were never ridiculous; and being
usually successful, could not be called extravagant. For herself, she
needed but her liberty and her books;--for others, she had her time, her
thoughts, her decided and resolute modes of action, all at their
command, whenever she was convinced that they had a just claim upon
them.

It was singular that the resolute and unshrinking Fanny should be the
daughter of Francis Derham; and the timid, retiring Ethel, of his bold
and daring protector. But this is no uncommon case. We feel the evil
results of our own faults, and endeavour to guard our children from
them; forgetful that the opposite extreme has also its peculiar dangers.
Lord Lodore attributed his early misfortunes to the too great freedom he
had enjoyed, or rather to the unlimited scope given to his will, from his
birth. Mr. Derham saw the unhappiness that had sprung from his own
yielding and undecided disposition. The one brought up his child to
dependence; the other taught his to disdain every support, except the
applause of her own conscience. Lodore fostered all the sensibility, all
the softness, of Ethel's feminine and delicat nature; while Fanny's
father strove to harden and confirm a character, in itself singularly
stedfast and upright.

In spite of the great contrast thus exhibited between Ethel and Fanny,
one quality created a good deal of similarity between them. There was in
both a total absence of every factitious sentiment. They acted from
their own hearts--from their own sense of right, without the
intervention of worldly considerations. A feeling of duty ruled all
their actions; and, however excellent a person's dispositions may be, it
yet requires considerable elevation of character never to deviate from
the strict line of honour and integrity.

Fanny's society a little relieved Ethel's solitude: yet that did not
weigh on her; and had she not been the child of her father's earliest
friend, and the companion of past days, she would have been disinclined,
at this period, to cultivate an intimacy with her. She needed no
companion except the thought of Edward, which was never absent from her
mind. But amidst all her affection for her husband, which gained
strength, and, as it were, covered each day a larger portion of her
being, any one associated with the name of Lodore--of her beloved father,
had a magic power to call forth her warmest feelings of interest. Both
ladies repeated to each other what they had heard from their several
parents. Mr. Derham had, among his many lessons of usefulness, descanted
on the generosity and boldness of Fitzhenry, as offering an example to
be followed. And during the last months of Lodore's life, he had
recurred, with passionate fondness, to the memory of his early years,
and painted in glowing colours the delicacy of feeling, the deep sense
of gratitude, and the latent but fervid enthusiasm, which adorned the
character of Francis Derham.




CHAPTER III


It does much trouble me to live without you:
Our loves and loving souls have been so used
To one household in us.

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


The week passed on. It was the month of January, and very cold. A black
frost bound up every thing with ice, and the piercing air congealed the
very blood. Each day Ethel went to see her husband;--each day she had to
encounter Mrs. Derham's intreaties not to go, and the reproaches of
Villiers for coming. Both were unavailing to prevent the daily
pilgrimage. Mrs. Derham sighed heavily when she saw her enter the
ricketty hackney-coach, whose damp lining, gaping windows, and miserable
straw, made it a _cold-bed_ for catarrh--a very temple for the spirit of
winter. Villiers each day besought her to have horses put to their
chariot, if she must come; but Ethel remembered all he had ever said of
expense, and his prognostications of how ill she would be able to endure
the petty, yet galling annoyances of poverty; and she resolved to prove,
that she could cheerfully bear every thing except separation from him.
With this laudable motive to incite her, she tasked her strength too
far. She kept up her spirits to meet him with a cheerful countenance;
and she contrived to conceal the sufferings she endured while they were
together. They got out and walked now and then; and this tended to keep
up the vital warmth. Their course was generally taken over Blackfriars
Bridge; and it was on their return across the river, on whose surface
large masses of ice floated, while a bitter north-east wind swept up,
bearing on its blasts the unthawed breath of the German Ocean, that she
felt the cold enter her heart, and make her head feel dizzy. Still she
could smile, and ask Villiers why he objected to her taking an exercise
even necessary for her health; and repeat again and again, that, bred in
America, an English winter was but a faint reflex of what she had
encountered there, and insist upon being permitted to come on the
following day. These were precious moments in her eyes, worth all the
pain they occasioned,--well worth the struggle she made for the
repetition. Edward's endearing attentions--the knowledge she had that
she was loved--the swelling and earnest affection that warmed her own
heart,--hallowed these hard-earned minutes, and gave her the sweet
pleasure of knowing that she demonstrated, in some slight degree, the
profound and all engrossing attachment which pervaded her entire being.
They parted; and often she arrived nearly senseless at Duke Street, and
once or twice fainted on entering the warm room: but it was not pain she
felt then--the emotions of the soul conquered the sensation of her body,
and pleasure, the intense pleasure of affection, was predominant through
all.

Sunday came again, and brought Villiers to her home. Mrs. Derham took
the opportunity to represent to him the injury that Ethel was doing
herself; and begged him, as he cared for her health, to forbid her
exposing herself to the inclement weather.

"You hear this, Ethel," said Villiers; "and yet you are obstinate. It
this right? What can I urge, what can I do, to prevent this wrong-headed
pertinacity?"

"You use such very hard words," replied Ethel, smiling, "that you
frighten me into believing myself criminal. But so far am I from
conceding, that you only give me courage to say, that I cannot any
longer endure the sad and separate life we lead. It must be changed,
dearest; we must be together."

Villiers was pacing the room impatiently: with an exclamation almost
approaching to anger, he stopped before his wife, to remonstrate and to
reproach. But as he gazed upon her upturned face, fixed so beseechingly
and fondly on him, he fancied that he saw the hues of ill-health
stealing across her cheeks, and thinness displacing the roundness of her
form. A strange emotion flashed across him; a new fear, too terrible
even to be acknowledged to himself, which passed, like the shadow of a
storm, across his anticipations, and filled him with inquietude. His
reprehension was changed to a caress, as he said, "You are right, my
love, quite right; we must not live thus. You are unable to take care of
yourself; and I am very wrong to give up my dearest privilege, of
watching day and night over the welfare of my only treasure. We will be
together, Ethel; if the worst come, it cannot be very bad, while we are
true to each other."

Tears filled the poor girl's eyes--tears of joy and tenderness--at
hearing Edward echo the sentiments she cherished as the most sacred in
the world. For a few minutes, they forgot every thing in the
affectionate kiss, which ratified, as it were, this new law; and then
Edward considered how best he could carry it into effect.

"Gayland," he said, (he was his solicitor,) "has appointed to see me on
Thursday morning, and has good hopes of definitively arranging the
conditions for the loan of the five hundred pounds, which is to enable
us to wait for better things. On Thursday evening, we will leave town.
We will go to some pretty country inn, to wait till I have signed these
papers; and trust to Providence that no ill will arise. We must not be
more than fifteen or twenty miles from London; so that when I am obliged
to go up, I can return again in a few hours. Tell me, sweet, does this
scheme please you?"

Ethel expressed her warmest gratitude; and then Villiers insinuated his
condition, that she should not come to see him in the interval, but
remain, taking care of herself, till, on Thursday afternoon, at six
o'clock, she came, with their chariot, to the northern side of St.
Paul's Churchyard, where he would immediately join her. They might
write, meanwhile: he promised letters as long as if they were to go to
India; and soothed her annoyance with every expression of thankfulness
at her giving up this point. She did give it up, with all the readiness
she could muster; and this increased, as he dwelt upon the enjoyment
they would share, in exchanging foggy, smoky London, for the
ever-pleasing aspect of nature, which, even during frost and snow,
possesses her own charms--her own wonders; and can gratify our senses by
a thousand forms of beauty, which have no existence in a dingy
metropolis.

When the evening hour came for the young pair to separate, their hearts
were cheered by the near prospect of re-union; and a belief that the, to
them, trivial privations of poverty were the only ones they would have
to endure. The thrill of fear which had crossed the mind of Villiers, as
to the health and preservation of his wife, had served to dissipate the
lingering sense of shame and degradation inspired by the penury of their
situation. He felt that there was something better than wealth, and the
attendance of his fellow-creatures; something worse than poverty, and
the world's scorn. Within the fragile form of Ethel, there beat a heart
of more worth than a king's ransom; and its pulsations were ruled by
him. To lose her! What would all that earth can afford, of power or
splendour, appear without her? He pressed her to his bosom, and knew
that his arms encircled all life's worth for him. Never again could he
forget the deep-felt appreciation of her value, which then took root in
his mind; while she, become conscious, by force of sympathy, of the kind
of revolution that was made in his sentiments, felt that the foundations
of her life grew strong, and that her hopes in this world became
stedfast and enduring. Before, a wall of separation, however slight, had
divided them; they had followed a system of conduct independent of each
other, and passed their censure upon the ideas of either. This was over
now--they were one--one sense of right--one feeling of happiness; and
when they parted that night, each felt that they truly possessed the
other; and that by mingling every hope and wish, they had confirmed the
marriage of their hearts.




CHAPTER IV


. . . . . . Think but whither
Now you can go; what you can do to live;
How near you have barred all ports to your own
succour.
Except this one that here I open, love.

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


The most pleasing thoughts shed their balmy influence on Ethel's repose
that night. Edward's scheme of a country inn, where the very freedom
would make them more entirely dependent upon each other, was absolutely
enchanting. Where we establish ourselves, and look forward to the
passage of a long interval of time, we form ties with, and assume duties
towards, many of our fellow-creatures, each of which must diminish the
singleness of the soul's devotion towards the selected one. No doubt
this is the fitting position for human beings to place themselves in, as
affording a greater scope for utility: but for a brief space, to have no
occupation but that of contributing to the happiness of him to whom her
life was consecrated, appeared to Ethel a very heaven upon earth. It was
not that she was narrow-hearted: so much affection demands a spacious
mansion for its abode; but in their present position of struggle and
difficulty, there was no possibility of extending her sphere of
benevolence, and she gladly concentrated her endeavours in the one
object whose happiness was in her hands.

All night, even in sleep, a peculiar sense of calm enjoyment soothed the
mind of Ethel, and she awoke in the morning with buoyant spirits, and a
soul all alive to its own pleasurable existence. She sat at her little
solitary breakfast table, musing with still renewed delight upon the
prospect opened before her, when suddenly she was startled by the vision
of an empty purse. What could Villiers intend? She felt assured that his
stock was very nearly exhausted, and for herself two sovereigns, which
were not sufficient to meet the demands of the last week, was all that
she possessed. She tried to recollect if Edward had said any thing that
denoted any expectation of receiving money; on the contrary--diving into
the recesses of her memory, she called to mind that he had said, "We
shall receive your poor little dividend of a hundred pounds, in less
than a fortnight, so we shall be able to live, even if Gayland should
delay getting the other money--I suppose we have enough to get on till
then."

He had said this inquiringly, and she knew that she had made a sign of
assent, though at the time, she had no thought of the real purport of
his question or of her answer. What was to be done? The obvious
consequence of her reflections was at once to destroy the cherished
scheme of going out of town with Villiers. This was a misfortune too
great to bear, and she at last decided upon having again recourse to her
aunt. Unused to every money transaction, she had not that terror of
obligation, nor dislike of asking, which is so necessary to preserve our
independence, and even our sense of justice, through life. Money had
always been placed like counters in her hand; she had never known whence
it came, and until her marriage, she had never disposed of more than
very small sums. Subsequently Villiers had been the director of their
expenses. This was the faulty part of her father's system of education.
But Lodore's domestic habits were for a great part founded on experience in
foreign countries, and he forgot that an English wife is usually the
cashier--the sole controller of the disbursements of her family. It
seemed as easy a thing for Ethel to ask for money from Mrs. Fitzhenry,
as she knew it would be easy for her to give. In compliance, however,
with Villiers's notions, she limited her request to ten pounds, and tried
to word her letter so as to create no suspicion in her aunt's mind with
regard to their resources. This task achieved, she dismissed every
annoying thought, and when Fanny came to express her hope, that, bleak
and snowy as was the day, she did not intend to make her accustomed
pilgrimage, with a countenance beaming with delight, she dilated on
their plan, and spoke as if on the much-desired Thursday, the gates of
Elysium were to be thrown open for her.

There would have appeared something childish in her gladness to the
abstracted and philosophic mind of Fanny, but that the real evils of her
situation, and the fortitude, touching in its unconscious simplicity,
with which she encountered them, commanded respect. Ethel, as well as
her friend, was elevated above the common place of life; she also
fostered a state of mind, "lofty and magnificent, fitted rather to
command than to obey, not only suffering patiently, but even making
light of all human cares; a grand and dignified self-possession, which
fears nothing, yields to no one, and remains for ever unvanquished."
When Fanny, in one of their conversations, while describing the uses of
philosophy, had translated this eulogium of its effects from Cicero,
Ethel had exclaimed, "This is love--it is love alone that divides us
from sordid earthborn thoughts, and causes us to walk alone, girt by its
own beauty and power."

Fanny smiled; yet while she saw slavery rather than a proud independence
in the creed of Ethel, she admired the warmth of heart which could endow
with so much brilliancy a state of privation and solitude. At the
present moment, when Mrs. Villiers was rapturously announcing their
scheme for leaving London, an expression of pain mantled over Fanny's
features; her clear blue eyes became suffused, a large tear gathered on
her lashes. "What is the matter?" asked Ethel anxiously.

"That I am a fool--but pardon me, for the folly is already passed away.
For the first time you have made it hard for me to keep my soul firm in
its own single existence. I have been debarred from all intercourse with
those whose ideas rise above the soil on which they tread, except in my
dear books, and I thought I should never be attached to any thing but
them. Yet do not think me selfish, Mr. Villiers is quite right--it is
much better that you should not be apart--I am delighted with his plan."

"Away or near, dear Fanny," said Ethel, in a caressing tone, "I never
can forget your kindness--never cease to feel the warmest friendship for
you. Remember, our fathers were friends, and their children ought to
inherit the same faithful attachment."

Fanny smiled faintly. "You must not seduce me from my resolves," she
said. "I know my fate in this world, and I am determined to be true to
myself to the end. Yet I am not ungrateful to you, even while I declare,
that I shall do my best to forget this brief interval, during which, I
have no longer, like Demogorgon, lived alone in my own world, but become
aware that there are ties of sympathy between me and my
fellow-creatures, in whose existence I did not believe before."

Fanny's language, drawn from her books, not because she tried to
imitate, but because conversing perpetually with them, it was natural
that she should adopt their style, was always energetic and imaginative;
but her quiet manner destroyed every idea of exaggeration of sentiment:
it was necessary to hear her soft and low, but very distinct voice utter
her lofty sentiments, to be conscious that the calm of deep waters was
the element in which she dwelt--not the fretful breakers that spend
themselves in sound.

The day seemed rather long to Ethel, who counted the hours until
Thursday. Gladly she laid her head on the pillow at night, and bade
adieu to the foregone hours. The first thing that awoke her in the
morning, was the postman's knock; it brought, as she had been promised,
a long, long letter from Edward. He had never before written with so
much affection or with such an overflowing of tenderness, that made her
the centre of his world--the calm fair lake to receive into its bosom
the streams of thought and feeling which flowed from him, and yet which,
after all, had their primal source in her. "I am a very happy girl,"
thought Ethel, as she kissed the beloved papers, and gazed on them in
ecstasy; "more happy than I thought it was ever given us to be in this
world."

She rose and began to dress; she delayed reading more than a line or
two, that she might enjoy her dearest pleasure for a longer time--then
again, unable to controul her impatience, she sat half dressed, and
finished all--and was begining anew, when there was a tap at her door.
It was Fanny. She looked disturbed and anxious, and Ethel's fears were
in a moment awake.

"Something annoying has occurred," she said; "yet I do not think that
there is any thing to dread, though there is a danger to prevent."

"Speak quickly," cried Ethel, "do not keep me in suspense."

"Be calm--it is nothing sudden, it is only a repetition of the old
story. A boy has just been here--a boy you gave a sovereign to--do you
remember?--the night of your arrival. It seems that he has vowed himself
to your service ever since. Those two odious men, who were here once,
are often at his master's place-an alehouse, you know. Well, yesterday
night, he overheard them saying, that Mr. Villiers's resort at the London
coffee-house, was discovered, or at least suspected, and that a writ was
to be taken out against him in the city."

"What does that mean?" cried Ethel.

"That Mr. Villiers will probably be arrested to-day, or to-morrow, if he
remains where he is."

"I will go directly to him," cried Ethel; "we must leave town at once.
God grant that I am not too late!"

Seeing her extreme agitation, Fanny remained with her--forced her to
take some breakfast, and then, fearing that if any thing had really
taken place, she would be quite bewildered, asked her permission to
accompany her. "Will you indeed come with me?" Ethel exclaimed, "How
dear, how good you are! O yes, do come--I can never go through it all
alone; I shall die, if I do not find him."

A hackney coach had been called, and they hastened with what speed they
might, to their destination. A kind of panic seized upon Ethel, a tremor
shook her limbs, so that when they at last stopped, she was unable to
speak. Fanny was about to ask for Mr. Villiers, when an exclamation of
joy from Ethel stopped her; Edward had seen them, and was at the coach
door. The snow lay thick around on the roofs of the houses, and on every
atom of vantage ground it could obtain; it was then snowing, and as the
chilly fleece dropped through or was driven about in the dark
atmosphere, it spread a most disconsolate appearance over every thing;
and nothing could look more dreary than poor Ethel's jumbling vehicle,
with its drooping animals, and the half-frozen driver. Villiers had made
up his mind that he should never be mortified by seeing her again in
this sort of equipage, and he hurried down, the words of reproach
already on his lips, "Is this your promise?" he asked.

"Yes, dearest, it is. Come in, there is danger here.--Come in--we must
go directly."

Seeing Fanny, Villiers became aware that there was some absolute cause
for their journey, so he obeyed and quickly heard the danger that
threatened him. "It would have been better," he said, "that you had come
in the carriage, and that we had instantly left town."

"Impossible!" cried Ethel; "till to-morrow--that is quite impossible. We
have no money until to-morrow."

"Well, my love, since it is so, we must arrange as well as we can. Do
you return home immediately--this cold will kill you. I will take care
of myself, and you can come for me on Thursday evening, as we proposed."

"Do not ask it of me, Edward," said Ethel; "I cannot leave you. I could
never live through these two days away from you--you must not desire
it--you will kill me."

Edward kissed her pale cheek. "You tremble," he said; "how violently you
tremble! Good God! what can we do? What would you have me do?"

"Any thing, so that we remain together. It is of so little consequence
where we pass the next twenty-four hours, so that we are together. There
are many hotels in town."

"I must not venture to any of these; and then to take you in this
miserable manner, without servants, or any thing to command attendance.
But you shall have your own way; having deprived you of every other
luxury, at least, you shall have your will; which, you know, compensates
for every thing with your obstinate sex."

Ethel smiled, rejoicing to find him in so good and accommodating a
humour. "Yes, pretty one," he continued, marking her feelings, "you
shall be as wretched and uncomfortable as your heart can desire. We will
play the incognito in such a style, that if our adventures were printed,
they would compete with those of Don Quixote and the fair Dulcinea. But
Miss Derham must not be admitted into our vagabondizing--we will not
detain her."

"Yet she must know whither we are going, to bring us the letters that
will confer freedom on us."

Villiers wrote hastily an address on a card. "You will find us there,"
he said. "Do not mention names when you come. We shall remain, I
suppose, till Thursday."

"But we shall see you some time to-morrow, dear Fanny?" asked Ethel.
Already she looked bright and happy; she esteemed herself fortunate to
have gained so easily a point she had feared she must struggle for--or
perhaps give up altogether. Fanny left them, and the coachman having
received his directions, drove slowly on through the deep snow, which
fell thickly on the road; while they, nestling close to each other, were
so engrossed by the gladness of re-union, that had Cinderella's
godmother transmuted their crazy vehicle for a golden coach, redolent of
the perfumes of fairy land, they had scarcely been aware of the change.
Their own hearts formed a more real fairy land, which accompanied them
whithersoever they went, and could as easily spread its enchantments
over the shattered machine in which they now jumbled along, as amidst
the cloth of gold and marbles of an eastern palace.




CHAPTER V


Few people know how little is necessary to live.
What is called or thought _hardship_ is nothing; _one_
unhappy feeling is worse than a thousand years of it.

LORD EDWARD FITZGERALD.


Uncertain what to do, Villiers had hastily determined that they should
take up their abode at a little inn near Brixton, to wait till Thursday.
He did not know the place except by having passed it, and observed a
smart landlady at the door; so he trusted that it would be neat and
clean. There was nothing imposing in the apperance of the young pair and
their hackney coach, accordingly there was no bustling civility
displayed to receive them. However, when the fire was once lighted, the
old-fashioned sofa drawn near, and dinner ordered, they sat together and
felt very happy; outcasts though they were, wanderers from civilized
existence, shut out, through poverty, from the refinements and gilt
elegancies of life.

One only cloud there was, when Villiers asked his wife an explanation
about their resources, and inquired whence she expected to receive money
on the following day. Ethel explained. Villiers looked disturbed. There
was something almost of anger in his voice, when he said, "And so,
Ethel, you feel no compunction in acting in exact opposition to my
wishes, my principles, my resolves?"

"But, dear Edward, what can principles have to do with borrowing a few
pounds from dear good Aunt Bessy? Besides, we can repay her."

"Be assured that we shall," replied Villiers; "and you will never again,
I trust, behave so unjustly by me. There are certain things in which we
must judge and act for ourselves, and the question of money
transactions is one. I may suffer--and you, alas! may also, through
poverty; though you have taken pains to persuade me, that you do not
feel that struggles, which, for your sake chiefly, embitter my
existence. Yet they are nothing in comparison with the loss of my
independence--the sense of obligation--the knowledge that my kind
friends can talk over my affairs, take me to task, and call me a burthen
to them. Why am I as I am? I have friends and connexions who would
readily assist me at this extremity, if I asked it, and I might turn
their kind feelings into sterling gold if I would; but I have no desire
to work this transmutation--I prefer their friendship."

"Do you mean," inquired his wife, "that your friends would not love you
the better for having been of service to you?"

"If they could serve me without annoyance to themselves they might; but
high in rank and wealthy as many of my relations are, there is not one
among them, at least of those to whom I could have recourse, who do not
dispose of their resources to the uttermost shilling, in their own way.
I then come to interfere with and to disarrange their plans; at first,
this might not be much--but presently they would weigh me against the
gold I needed, and it might happen, that my scale would kick the beam.

"I speak for myself not for others; I may be too proud, too
sensitive--but so I am. Ever since I knew what pecuniary obligations
were, I resolved to lay under such to no man, and this resolve was
stronger than my love for you; judge therefore of its force, and the
violence you do me, when you would oblige me to act against it. Did I
begin to borrow, a train of thoughts would enter the lender's mind; the
consciousness of which, would haunt me like a crime. My actions would be
scanned--I should be blamed for this, rebuked for that--even your name,
my Ethel, which I would place, like a star in the sky, far above their
mathematical measurements, would become stale in their mouths, and the
propriety of our marriage canvassed: could you bear that?"

"I yield to all you say," she answered; "yet this is strange morality.
Are generosity, benevolence, and gratitude, to be exploded among us? Is
justice, which orders that the rich give of his superfluity to the poor,
to be banished from the world?"

"You are eloquent," said Villiers; "but, my little wild American, this
is philosophy for the back-woods only. We have got beyond the primeval
simplicity of barter and exchange among gentlemen; and it is such if I
give gratitude in return for fifty pounds: by-and-by my fellow-trader
may grumble at the bargain. All this will become very clear to you
hereafter, I fear--when knowledge of the world teaches you what sordid
knaves we all are; it is to prevent your learning this lesson in a
painful way, that I guard you so jealously from making a wrong step at
this crisis."

"You speak of dreams," said Ethel, "as if dear aunt Bessy would feel any
thing but pleasure in sending her mite to her own dear niece."

"I have told you what I wish," replied her husband, "my honour is in
your hands; and I implore you, on this point, to preserve it in the way
I desire. There is but one relationship that authorizes any thing like
community of goods, it is that of parent and child; but we are orphans,
dearest--step-children, who are not permitted to foster our filial
sentiments. My father is unworthy of his name--the animal who destroys
its offspring at its birth is merciful in comparison with him: had he
cast me off at once, I should have hardened my hands with labour, and
earned my daily bread; but I was trained to "high-born necessities," and
have all the "wide wants and narrow powers"[1] of the heir of wealth. But
let us dismiss this ungrateful subject. I never willingly advert, even
in my own mind, to my father's unpaternal conduct. Let us instead fancy,
sweet love, that we were born to what we have--that we are cottagers,
the children of mechanics, or wanderers in a barbarous country, where
money is not; and imagine that this repose, this cheerful fire, this
shelter from the pelting snow without, is an unexpected blessing. Strip
a man bare to what nature made him, and place him here, and what a hoard
of luxury and wealth would not this room contain! In the Illinois, love,
few mansions could compete with this."

This was speaking in a language which Ethel could easily comprehend; she
had several times wished to express this very idea, but she feared to
hurt the refined and exclusive feelings of her husband. A splendid
dwelling, costly living, and many attendants, were with her the
adjuncts, not the material, of life. If the stage on which she played
her part was to be so decorated, it was well; if otherwise, the change
did not merit her attention. Love scoffed at such idle trappings, and
could build his tent of canvas, and sleep close nestled in her heart as
softly, being only the more lovely and the more true, from the absence
of every meretricious ornament.

This was another of Ethel's happy evenings, when she felt drawn close to
him she loved, and found elysium in the intimate union of their
thoughts. The dusky room showed them but half to each other; and the
looks of each, beaming with tenderness, drank life from one another's
gaze. The soft shadows thrown on their countenances, gave a lamp-like
lustre to their eyes, in which the purest spirit of affection sat,
weaving such unity of sentiment, such strong bonds of attachment, as
made all life dwindle to a point, and freighted the passing minute with
the hopes and fears of their entire existence. Not much was said, and
their words were childish--words


Intellette dar loro soli ambedui,


which a listener would have judged to be meaningless. But the mystery of
love gave a deep sense to each syllable. The hours flew lightly away. There
was nothing to interrupt, nothing to disturb. Night came and the day was
at an end; but Ethel looked forward to the next, with faith in its equal
felicity, and did not regret the fleet passage of time.

They had been asked during the evening if they were going by any early
coach on the following morning, and a simple negative was given. On that
morning they sat at their breakfast, with some diminution of the
sanguine hopes of the previous evening. For morning is the time for
action, of looking forward, of expectation,--and they must spend this in
waiting, cooped up in a little room, overlooking no cheering scene. A
high road, thickly covered with snow, on which various vehicles were
perpetually passing, was immediately before them. Opposite was a row of
mean-looking houses, between which might be distinguished low fields
buried in snow; and the dreary dark-looking sky bending over all, added
to the forlorn aspect of nature. Villiers was very impatient to get
away, yet another day must be passed here, and there was no help.

On the breakfast-table the waiter had placed the bill of the previous
day; it remained unnoticed, and he left it on the table when the things
were taken away. "I wonder when Fanny will come," said Ethel.

"Perhaps not at all to-day," observed Villiers, "she knows that we
intend to remain till tomorrow here; and if your aunt's letter is
delayed till then, I see no chance of her coming, nor any use in it."

"But Aunt Bessy will not delay; her answer is certain of arriving this
morning."

"So you imagine, love. You know little of the various chances that wait
upon borrowing."

Soon after, unable to bear confinement to the house, uneasy in his
thoughts, and desirous a little to dissipate them by exercise, Villiers
went out. Ethel, taking a small Shakspeare, which her husband had had
with him at the coffee-house, occupied herself by reading, or turning
from the written page to her own thoughts, gave herself up to reverie,
dwelling on many an evanescent idea, and reverting delightedly to many
scenes, which her memory recalled. She was one of those who "know the
pleasures of solitude, when we hold commune alone with the tranquil
solemnity of nature." The thought of her father, of the Illinois, and
the measureless forest rose before her, and in her ear was the dashing
of the stream which flowed near their abode. Her light feet again
crossed the prairie, and a thousand appearances of sky and earth
departed for ever, were retraced in her brain. "Would not Edward be
happy there?" she thought: "why should we not go? We should miss dear
Horatio; but what else could we regret that we leave behind? and perhaps
he would join us, and then we should be quite happy." And then her fancy
pictured her new home and all its delights, till her eyes were suffused
with tender feeling, as her imagination sketched a variety of
scenes--the pleasant labours of cultivation, the rides, the hunting, the
boating, all common-place occurrences, which, attended on by love, were
exalted into a perpetual gorgeous procession of beatified hours. And
then again she allowed to herself that Europe or America could contain
the same delights. She recollected Italy, and her feelings grew more
solemn and blissful as she meditated on the wondrous beauty and
changeful but deep interest of that land of memory.

Villiers did not return for some hours;--he also had indulged in
reverie--long-drawn, but not quite so pleasant as that of his
inexperienced wife. The realities of life were kneaded up too entirely
with his prospects and schemes, for them to assume the fairy hues that
adorned Ethel's. He could not see the end to his present struggle for
the narrowest independence. Very slender hopes had been held out to him;
and thus he was to drag out an embittered existence, spent upon sordid
cares, till his father died--an ungrateful idea, from which he turned
with a sigh. He walked speedily, on account of the cold; and as his
blood began to circulate more cheerily in his frame, a change came over
the tenor of his thoughts. From the midst of the desolation in which he
was lost, a vision of happiness arose, that forced itself on his
speculations, in spite, as he imagined, of his better reason. The image
of an elegant home, here or in Italy, adorned by Ethel--cheered by the
presence of friends, unshadowed by any cares, presented itself to his
mind with strange distinctness and pertinacity. At no time had Villiers
loved so passionately as now. The difficulties of their situation had
exalted her, who shared them with such cheerful fortitude, into an angel
of consolation. The pride of man in possessing the affections of this
lovely and noble-minded creature, was blended with the tenderest desire
of protecting and serving her. His heart glowed with honest joy at the
reflection that her happiness depended upon him solely, and that he was
ready to devote his life to secure it. Was there any action too arduous,
any care too minute, to display his gratitude and his perfect affection?
As his recollection came back, he found that he was at a considerable
distance from her, so he swiftly turned his steps homeward, (that was
his home where she was,) and scarcely felt that he trod earth as he
recollected that each moment carried him nearer, and that he should soon
meet the fond gaze of the kindest, sweetest eyes in the world.

Thus they met, with a renewed joy, after a short absence, each reaping,
from their separate meditations, a fresh harvest of loving thoughts and
interchange of grateful emotion. Great was the pity that such was their
situation--that circumstances, all mean and trivial, drew them from
their heaven-high elevation, to the more sordid cares of this dirty
planet. Yet why name it pity? their pure natures could turn the
grovelling substance presented to them, to ambrosial food for the
sustenance of love.


[Footnote 1: The Cenci.]




CHAPTER VI


There's a bliss beyond all that the minstrel has told,
When two that are linked in one heavenly tie,
With heart never changing, and brow never cold,
Love on through all ills, and love on till they die.

LALLA ROOKH.


Villiers had not been returned long, when the waiter came in, and
informed them, that his mistress declined serving their dinner, till her
bill of the morning was paid; and then he left the room. The gentle pair
looked at each other, and laughed. "We must wait till Fanny comes, I
fear," said Ethel; "for my purse is literally empty."

"And if Miss Derham should not come?" remarked Villiers.

"But she will!--she has delayed, but I am perfectly certain that she
will come in the course of the day: I do not feel the least doubt about
it."

To quicken the passage of time, Ethel employed herself in netting a
purse, (the inutility of which Villiers smilingly remarked,) while her
husband read to her some of the scenes from Shakspeare's play of
"Troilus and Cressida." The profound philosophy, and intense passion, of
this drama, adorned by the most magnificent poetry that can even be
found in the pages of this prince of poets, caused each to hang
attentive and delighted upon their occupation. As it grew dark, Villiers
stirred up the fire, and still went on; till having with difficulty
decyphered the lines--


"She was beloved--she loved;--she is, and doth;
But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth,"--


he closed the books. "It is in vain," he said; "our liberator does
not come; and these churls will not give us lights."

"It is early yet, dearest," replied Ethel;--"not yet four o'clock. Would
Troilus and Cressida have repined at having been left darkling a few
minutes? How much happier we are than all the heroes and heroines that
ever lived or were imagined! they grasped at the mere shadow of the
thing, whose substance we absolutely possess. Let us know and
acknowledge our good fortune. God knows, I do, and am beyond words
grateful!"

"It is much to be grateful for--sharing the fortunes of a ruined man!"

"You do not speak as Troilus does," replied Ethel smiling: "he knew
better the worth of love compared with worldly trifles."

"You would have me protest, then," said Villiers;--


"But, alas!
I am as true as truth's simplicity,
And simpler than the infancy of truth;"


"so that all I can say is, that you are a very ill-used little girl, to be
mated as you are--so buried, with all your loveliness, in this
obscurity--so bound, though akin to heaven, to the basest dross of
earth."

"You are poetical, dearest, and I thank you. For my own part, I am in
love with ill luck. I do not think we should have discovered how very
dear we are to each other, had we sailed for ever on a summer sea."

Such talk, a little prolonged, at length dwindled to silence. Edward
drew her nearer to him; and as his arm encircled her waist, she placed
her sweet head on his bosom, and they remained in silent reverie. He, as
with his other hand he played with her shining ringlets, and parted them
on her fair brow, was disturbed in thought, and saddened by a sense of
degradation. Not to be able to defend the angelic creature, who depended
on him, from the world's insults, galled his soul, and embittered even
the heart's union that existed between them. She did not think--she did
know of these things. After many minutes of silence, she said,--"I have
been trying to discover why it is absolute pleasure to suffer pain for
those we love."

"Pleasure in pain!--you speak riddles."

"I do," she replied, raising her head; "but I have divined this. The
great pleasure of love is derived from sympathy--the feeling of
union--of unity. Any thing that makes us alive to the sense of
love--that imprints deeper on our plastic consciousness the knowledge of
the existence of our affection, causes an increase of happiness. There
are two things to which we are most sensitive--pleasure and pain. But
habit can somewhat dull the first; and that which was in its newness,
ecstasy--our being joined for ever--becomes, like the air we breathe, a
thing we could not live without, but yet in which we are rather
passively than actively happy. But when pain comes to awaken us to a
true sense of how much we love--when we suffer for one another's dear
sake--the consciousness of attachment swells our hearts: we are recalled
from the forgetfulness engendered by custom; and the awakening and
renewal of the sense of affection brings with it a joy, that sweetens to
its dregs the bitterest cup."

"Encourage this philosophy, dear Ethel," replied Villiers; "you will
need it: but it shames me to think that I am your teacher in this
mournful truth." As he spoke, his whole frame was agitated by tenderness
and grief. Ethel could see, by the dull fire-light, a tear gather on his
eye-lashes: it fell upon her hand. She threw her arms round him, and
pressed him to her heart with a passionate gush of weeping, occasioned
partly by remorse at having so moved him, and partly by her heart's
overflowing with the dear security of being loved.

They had but a little recovered from this scene, when the waiter,
bringing in lights, announced Miss Derham. Her coming had been full of
disasters. After many threatenings, and much time consumed in clumsy
repairs, her hackney-coach had fairly broken down: she had walked the
rest of the way; but they were much further from town than she expected;
and thus she accounted for her delay. She brought no news; but held in
her hand the letter that contained the means of freeing them from their
awkward predicament.

"We will not stay another minute in this cursed place," said Villiers:
"we will go immediately to Salt Hill, where I intended to take you
to-morrow. I can return by one of the many stages which pass
continually, to keep my appointment with Gayland; and be back with you
again by night. So if these stupid people possess a post-chaise, we will
be gone directly."

Ethel was well pleased with this arrangement; and it was put it
execution immediately. The chaise and horses were easily procured. They
set Fanny down in their way through town. Ethel tried to repay her
kindness by heartfelt thanks; and she, in her placid way, showed clearly
how pleased she was to serve them.

Leaving her in Piccadilly, not far from her own door, they pursued their
way to Salt Hill; and it seemed as if, in this more change of place,
they had escaped from a kind of prison, to partake again in the
immunities and comforts of civilized life. Ethel was considerably
fatigued when she arrived; and her husband feared that he had tasked her
strength too far. The falling and fallen snow clogged up the roads, and
their journey had been long. She slept, indeed, the greater part of the
way, her head resting on him; and her languor and physical suffering
were soothed by emotions the most balmy and by the gladdening sense of
confidence and security.

They arrived at Salt Hill late in the evening. The hours were precious;
for early on the following day, Villiers was obliged to return to town.
On inquiry, he found that his best mode was to go by a night-coach from
Bath, which would pass at seven in the morning. They were awake half the
night, talking of their hopes, their plans, their probable deliverance
from their besetting annoyances. By this time Ethel had taught her own
phraseology, and Villiers had learned to believe that whatever must
happen would fall upon both, and that no separation could take place
fraught with any good to either.

When Ethel awoke, late in the morning, Villiers was gone. Her watch told
her, indeed, that it was near ten o'clock, and that he must have
departed long before. She felt inclined to reproach him for leaving her,
though only for a few hours, without an interchange of adieu. In truth,
she was vexed that he was not there: the world appeared to her so blank,
without his voice to welcome her back to it from out of the regions of
sleep. While this slight cloud of ill-humour (may it be called?) was
passing over her mind, she perceived a little note, left by her husband,
lying on her pillow. Kissing it a thousand times, she read its contents,
as if they possessed talismanic power. They breathed the most passionate
tenderness: they besought her, as she loved him, to take care of
herself, and to keep up her spirits until his return, which would be as
speedy as the dove flies back to its nest, where its sweet mate fondly
expects him. With these assurances and blessings to cheer her, Ethel
arose. The sun poured its wintry yet cheering beams into the parlour,
and the sparkling, snow-clad earth glittered beneath. She wrapped
herself in her cloak, and walked into the garden of the hotel. Long
immured in London, living as if its fogs were the universal vesture of
all things, her spirits rose to exultation and delight, as she looked on
the blue sky spread cloudlessly around. As the pure breeze freshened her
cheek, a kind of transport seized her; her spirit took wings; she felt
as if she could float on the bosom of the air--as if there was a
sympathy in nature, whose child and nursling she was, to welcome her
back to her haunts, and to reward her bounteously for coming. The trees,
all leafless and snow-bedecked, were friends and intimates: she kissed
their rough barks, and then laughed at her own folly at being so rapt.
The snow-drop, as it peeped from the ground, was a thing of wonder and
mystery; and the shapes of frost, beautiful forms to be worshipped. All
sorrow--all care passed away, and left her mind as clear and bright as
the unclouded heavens that bent over her.




CHAPTER VII


Herein
Shall my captivity be made my happiness;
Since what I lose in freedom, I regain
With interest.

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


The glow of enthusiasm and gladness, thus kindled in her soul, faded
slowly as the sun descended; and human tenderness returned in full tide
upon her. She longed for Edward to speak to; when would he come back?
She walked a little way on the London road; she returned: still her
patience was not exhausted. The sun's orb grew red and dusky as it
approached the horizon: she returned to the house. It was yet early:
Edward could not be expected yet: he had promised to come as soon as
possible; but he had prepared her for the likelihood of his arrival only
by the mail at night. It was long since she had written to Saville.
Cooped up in town, saddened by her separation from her husband, or
enjoying the brief hours of reunion, she had felt disinclined to write.
Her enlivened spirits now prompted her to pour out some of their
overflowings to him. She did not allude to any of the circumstances of
their situation, for Edward had forbidden that topic: still she had much
to say; for her heart was full of benevolence to all mankind; besides
her attachment to her husband, the prospect of becoming a mother within
a few months, opened another source of tenderness; there seemed to be a
superabundance of happiness within her, a portion of which she desired
to impart to those she loved.

Daylight had long vanished, and Villiers did not return. She felt
uneasy:--of course he would come by the mail; yet if he should not--what
could prevent him? Conjectures would force themselves on her,
unreasonable, she told herself; yet her doubts were painful, and she
listened attentively each time that the sound of wheels grew, and again
faded, upon her ear. If the vehicle stopped, she was in a state of
excitation that approached alarm. She knew not what she feared; yet her
disquiet increased into anxiety. "Shall I ever see him again?" were
words that her lips did not utter, and yet which lingered in her heart,
although unaccompanied by any precise idea to her understanding.

She had given a thousand messages to the servants;--and at last the mail
arrived. She heard a step--it was the waiter:--"The gentleman is not
come, ma'am," he said. "I knew it," she thought;--"yet why? why?" At one
time she resolved to set off for town; yet whither to go--where to find
him? An idea struck her, that he had missed the mail; but as he would
not leave her a prey to uncertainty, he would come by some other
conveyance. She got a little comfort from this notion, and resumed her
occupation of waiting; though the vagueness of her expectations rendered
her a thousand times more restless than before. And all was vain. The
mail had arrived at eleven o'clock--at twelve she retired to her room.
She read again and again his note: his injunction, that she should take
care of herself, induced her to go to bed at a little after one; but
sleep was still far from her. Till she could no longer expect--till it
became certain that it must be morning before he could come, she did not
close her eyes. As her last hope quitted her, she wept bitterly. Where
was the joyousness of the morning?--the exuberant delight with which her
veins had tingled, which had painted life as a blessing? She hid her
face in her pillow, and gave herself up to tears, till sleep at last
stole over her senses.

Early in the morning her door opened and her curtain was drawn aside.
She awoke immediately, and saw Fanny Derham standing at her bed-side.

"Edward! where is he?" she exclaimed, starting up.

"Well, quite well," replied Fanny: "do not alarm yourself, dear Mrs.
Villiers,--he has been arrested."

"I must go to him immediately. Leave me for a little while, dear
Fanny,--I will dress and come to you; do you order the chaise meanwhile.
I can hear every thing as we are going to town."

Ethel trembled violently--her speech was rapid but inarticulate; the
paleness that overspread her face, blanching even her marble brow, and
the sudden contraction of her features, alarmed Fanny. The words she had
used in communicating her intelligence were cabalistic to Ethel, and her
fears were the more intolerable because mysterious and undefined; the
blood trickled cold in her veins, and a chilly moisture stood on her
forehead. She exerted herself violently to conquer this weakness, but it
shackled her powers, as bands of rope would her limbs, and after a few
moments she sank back on her pillow almost bereft of life. Fanny sprang
to the bell, then sprinkled her with water; some salts were procured
from the landlady, and gradually the colour revisited her cheeks, and
her frame resumed its functions--an hysteric fit, the first she had ever
had, left her at last exhausted but more composed. She herself became
frightened lest illness should keep her from Villiers; she exerted
herself to become tranquil, and lay for some time without speaking or
moving. A little refreshment contributed to restore her, and she turned
to Fanny with a faint sweet smile, "You see," said she, "what a weak,
foolish thing I am; but I am well now, quite rallied--there must be no
more delay."

Her cheerful voice and lively manner gave her friend confidence. Fanny
was one who believed much in the mastery of mind, and felt sure that
nothing would be so prejudicial to Mrs. Villiers as contradiction, and
obstacles put in the way of her attaining the object of her wishes. In
spite therefore of the good people about, who insisted that the most
disastrous consequences would ensue, she ordered the horses, and
prepared for their immediate journey to town. Ethel repaid her cares
with smiles, while she restrained her curiosity, laid as it were a check
on her too impatient movements, and forced a calm of manner which gave
her friend courage to proceed.

It was not until they were on their way that the object of their journey
was mentioned. Fanny then spoke of the arrest as a trifling
circumstance--mentioned bail, and twenty things, which Ethel only
comprehended to be mysterious methods of setting him free; and then also
she asked the history of what had happened. The tale was soon told. The
moment Mr. Villiers had entered Piccadilly he had caused a coach to be
called, but on passing to it from the stage, two men entered it with
him, whose errand was too easily explained. He had driven first to his
solicitor's, hoping to put every thing in train for his instant
liberation. The day was consumed in these fruitless endeavours--he did
not give up hope till past ten at night, when he sent to Fanny, asking
her to go down to Mrs. Villiers as early as possible in the morning, and
to bring her up to town. His wish was, he said, that Ethel should take
up her abode at Mrs. Derham's till this affair could be arranged, and
they were enabled to leave London. His note was hurried; he promised
that another, more explicit, should await his wife on her arrival.

"You will tell the driver," said Ethel, when this story was finished,
"to drive to Edward's prison. I would not stay away five minutes from
him in his present situation to purchase the universe."

Any one but Miss Derham might have resisted Ethel's wish--have argued
with her, and irritated her by the display of obstacles and
inconveniences. It was not Fanny's method ever to oppose the desires of
others. They knew best, she affirmed, their own sensations, and what was
most fitting for them. What is best for me, habit, education, and a
different texture of character, may render the worst for them. In the
present instance, also, she saw that Ethel's feelings were almost too
high wrought for her strength--that opposition, by making a further call
on her powers, might upset them wholly. She had besides, the deepest
respect for her attachment to her husband, and was willing to reward it
by bringing her to him without delay. Having thus fortunately fallen
into reasonable hands, guided by one who could understand her character,
and not torture her by forcing notions the opposite of those on which
she felt herself compelled to act, Ethel became tranquil, and saw the
mere panic of inexperience in her previous excessive alarm.

They now approached London. Fanny called the post-boy to the window of
the chaise, and gave him directions, at which he a little stared, but
said nothing. She gave things their own names, and never dreamt of
saving appearances, as it is called. What ought to be done, that she
dared do in the face of the whole world, and therefore to make a mystery
of their destination never once occurred to her. They drove through the
long interminable suburbs--through Piccadilly and the Strand. Ethel's
cheeks flushed with the excitement, and something like apprehension made
her heart flutter. She had endeavoured to form an image in her own mind
of whither they were going--it was vague and therefore frightful--but
Edward was there, and she also would share the horrors of his
prison-house.

They passed through Temple Bar, and going down an obscure street or two,
stopped at a dingy door-way. "This is not right," said Ethel, almost
gasping for breath, "this is not a prison."

"Something very like it, as you will find too soon," said her friend.

Still Ethel's imagination was relieved by the absence of the massy
walls, the portentous gates, the gloomy immensity of an absolute prison.
The door of the house being opened, Ethel stepped out from the chaise
and asked for Mr. Villiers. The man whom she addressed hesitated, but
Ethel had learnt one only worldly lesson, which was, whenever she needed
the services of people of the lower orders, to disseminate money
plentifully. Her purse was in her hand, and she gave a sovereign to the
man, who then at once showed them upstairs; which she ascended, though
every limb nearly refused to perform its office as she approached the
spot where again she was to find--to see him, whose image lived
eternally in her heart, and whom it was the sole joy of her life to wait
on, to be sheltered by, to live near.

The door was opened. In the dingy, dusty room, beside the fire, which
looked as if it could not burn, and was never meant to warm even the
black neglected grate, Villiers sat, reading. His first emotion was
shame when he saw Ethel enter. There was no accord between her spotless
loveliness and his squalid prison-room. Any one who has seen a sunbeam
suddenly enter and light up a scene of housewifely neglect, and vulgar
discomfort, and felt how obtrusive it rendered all that might be
half-forgotten in the shade, can picture how the simple elegance of
Ethel displayed yet more distinctly to her husband the worse than
beggarly scene in which she found him. His cheeks flushed, and almost he
would have turned away. He would have reproached, but a tenderness and
an elevation of feeling animated her expressive countenance, which
turned the current of his thoughts. Whether it were their fate to suffer
the extremes of fortune in the savage wilderness, or in the more
appalling privations of civilized life--love, and the poetry of love
accompanied her, and gilded, and irradiated the commonest forms of
penury. She looked at him, and her eyes then glanced to the barred
windows. As Fanny and their conductor left them, she heard the key turn
in the lock with an impertinent intrusive loudness. She felt pained for
him, but for herself it was as if the world and all its cares were
locked out, and as if in this near association with him, she reaped the
reward of all her previous anxiety. There was no repining in her
thoughts, no dejection in her manner; Villiers could read in her open
countenance, as plainly as through the clearest crystal, the sentiments
that were passing in her mind--it was something more satisfied than
resignation, more contented than fortitude. It was a knowledge that
whatever evil might attend her lot, the good so far outweighed it, that,
for his sake only, could she advert to any feeling of distress. It was a
consciousness of being in her place, and of fulfilling her duty,
accompanied by a sort of rapture in remembering how thrice dear and
hallowed that duty was. Angels could not feel as she did, for they
cannot sacrifice to those they love; yet there was in her that absence
of all self-emanating pain, which is the characteristic of what we are
told of the angelic essences.

As when at night autumnal winds are howling, and vast masses of winged
clouds are driven with indescribable speed across the sky--we note the
islands of dark ether, built round by the white fleecy shapes; and as we
mark the stars which gem their unfathomable depth, silence and sublime
tranquillity appear to have found a home in that deep vault, and we love
to dwell on the peace and beauty that live there, while the clouds still
rush on, and the face of the lower heaven is more mutable than water.
Thus the mind of Ethel, surrounded by the world's worst forms of
adversity, showed clear and serene, entirely possessed by the repose of
love. It was impossible but that, in spite of shame and regret, Villiers
should not participate in these feelings. He gave himself up to the
softening influence: he knew not how to repine on his own account;
Ethel's affection demanded to stand in place of prosperity, and he could
not refuse to admit so dear a claim.

The door had closed on them, and every outlet to liberty, or the
enjoyment of life, was barred up. Edward drew Ethel towards him and
kissed her fondly. Their eyes met, and the speechless tenderness that
beamed from hers reached his heart and soothed every ruffled feeling.
Sitting together, and interchanging a few words of comfort and hope,
mingled with kind looks and affectionate caresses, they neither of them
remembered indignity nor privation. The tedious mechanism of civilized
life, and the odious interference of their fellow-creatures were
forgotten, and they were happy.




CHAPTER VIII


Veggo purtroppo
Che favola è la vita,
E la favola mia non è compita.

PETRARCA.


The darker months of winter had passed away, and the chilly, blighting
English spring begun. Towards the end of March Lady Lodore came to town.
She had long ago, in her days of wealth, fitted up a house in Park Lane, so
she returned to it, as to a home--if home it might be called--where no
one welcomed her--where none sat beside her at the domestic hearth.

For the first time she felt keenly this circumstance. During her
mother's lifetime she had had her constantly for a companion, and
afterwards as events pressed upon her, and while the anguish she felt
upon Horatio Saville's marriage was still fresh, she had not reverted to
her lonely position as the source of pain.

The haughty, the firm, the self-exalting soul of Cornelia had borne up
long. She had often felt that she walked on the borders of a precipice,
and that if once she admitted sentiments of regret, she should plunge
without retrieve into a gulph, dark, portentous, inextricable. She had
often repeated to herself that fate should not vanquish her, and that in
spite of despair she would be happy: it is true that the misery
occasioned by Saville's marriage was a canker at her heart, for which
there was no cure, but she had recourse to dissipation that she might
endeavour to forget it. A sad and ineffectual remedy. She was surrounded
by admirers, whom she disdained, and by friends to whom she would have
died rather than betray the naked misery of her soul. She had never
planned nor thought of marriage. The report concerning the Earl of
D----was one of those which the world always makes current, when two
persons of opposite sexes are, by any chance, thrown much together. His
sister was Lady Lodore's friend, and she had chaperoned her, and been of
assistance to her, during the courtship of the gentleman who was at
present her husband. It was their house that Lady Lodore had just
quitted on arriving in town. The new-born happiness of early wedded life
had been a scene to call her back to thoughts which were the sources of
the bitterest anguish. She abhorred herself that she could envy, that
she could desire to exchange places with, any created being. She
abridged her visit, and fancied that she should regain peace in the
independence of her own home. But the enjoyment of liberty was cold in
her heart, and loneliness added a freezing chilliness to her feeling.

The mind of Cornelia was much above the world she lived in, though she
had sacrificed all to it; and, so to speak, much above herself. Take
pride from her, and there was understanding, magnanimity, and great
kindliness of disposition: but pride had been the wall of China to shut
up all her better qualities, and to keep them from communicating with
the world beyond;--pride, which grew strong by resistance, and towered
above every aggressor;--pride, which crumbled away, when time and change
were its sole assailants, till her inner being was left unprotected and
bare.

She found herself alone in the world. She felt that her life was
aimless, unprofitable, blank. She was humiliated and saddened by her
relative position in the world. She did not think of her daughter as a
resource; she was in the hands of her enemies, and no hope lay there.
She entertained the belief that Mrs. Villiers was weak both in character
and understanding; and that to make any attempt to interest herself in
her, would end in disappointment, if not disgust. Imagining, as we are
all apt to do, how we should act in another person's place, she had
formed a notion of what she would have done, had she been Ethel; and as
nothing was done, she almost despised, and quite pitied her. No! there
was no help. She was alone;--none loved, none cared for her; and the
flower of the field, which a child plucks and wears for an hour, and
then casts aside, was of more worth than she.

Every amusement grew tedious--all society vacant and dull. When she came
back from dinners or assemblies, to her luxurious but empty abode, the
darkest thoughts, engendered by spleen, hung over its threshold, and
welcomed her return. At such times, she would dismiss her attendant, and
remain half the night by her fireside, encouraging sickly reveries,
struggling with the fate that bound her, yet unable in any way to make
an effort for freedom.

"Time"--thus would her thoughts fashion themselves--"yes, time rolls on,
and what does it bring? I live in a desert; its barren sands feed my
hour-glass, and they come out fruitless as they went in. Months change
their names--years their cyphers: my brow is sadly trenched; the bloom
of youth is faded: my mind gathers wrinkles. What will become of me?

"Hopes of my youth, where are ye?--my aspirations, my pride, my belief
that I could grasp and possess all things? Alas! there is nothing of all
this! My soul lies in the dust; and I look up to know that I have been
playing with shadows, and that I am fallen for ever! What do I see
around me? The tide of life is ebbing fast! I had fancied that pearls
and gold would have been left by the retiring waves; and I find only
barren, lonely sands! No voice reaches me from across the waters--no one
stands beside me on the shore! Would--O would I could lay my head on the
spray-sprinkled beach, and sleep for ever!

"This is madness!--these incoherent images that throng my brain are the
ravings of insanity!--yet what greater madness, than to know that love,
affection, the charities of life, the hopes of existence, are empty
words for me. Am I indeed to have done with these? What is it that still
moves up and down in my soul, making me feel as if something might yet
be accomplished? Is it that the ardour of youth is not yet tamed? Alas!
my youth has departed for ever. Yet wherefore these sighs, which wrap an
eternity of wretchedness in their evanescent breath?--why these tears,
that, flowing from the inmost fountains of the soul, endeavour to give
passage to the flood of sorrow that deluges and overwhelms it? The
husband of my youth!--the thought of him passes like a shadow across me!
Had he borne with me a little longer--had I submitted to his
controul--how different my destiny had been! But I will not think of
that--I do not! A mightier storm than any he could raise has swept
across me since, and laid all waste. My soul has been set upon a hope,
which has vanished, and desolation has come in its room. Could God, in
his anger, bestow a bitterer curse on a condemned spirit, than that
which weighs on me, when I reflect, that through my own fault I lost
him, whom but to see was paradise? The thought haunts me like a crime;
yet when is it absent from me?--it sleeps with me, rises with me--it is
by me now, and I would willingly die only to dismiss it for ever.

"Miserable Cornelia! Thou hast been courted, lauded, waited on,
loved!--it is all over! I am alone! My poor, poor mother!--my much
reviled, my dearest mother!--by you, at least, I was valued! Ah! why are
you gone, leaving your wretched child alone?

"O that I could take wings and rise from out of the abyss into which I
am fallen! Can I not, myself being miserable, take pleasure in the
pleasure of others; and by force of strong sympathy, forget my selfish
woes? With whom can I sympathize? None desire my care, and all would
repay my officiousness with ingratitude, perhaps with scorn. Once I
could assist the poor; now I am poor myself: my limited means scarce
suffice to keep me in that station in society, from which, did I once
descend, I were indeed trampled upon and destroyed for ever. Tears rush
from my eyes--my heart sinks within me, as I look forward. Again the
same cares, the same coil, the same bitter result. Hopes held out, only
to be crushed; affections excited, only to be scattered to the winds. I
blamed myself for struggling too much with fate, for rowing against wind
and tide, for resolving to controul the events that form existence: now
I yield--I have long yielded--I have let myself drift, as I hoped, into
a quiet creek, where indifference and peace ruled the hour; and lo! it
is a whirlpool, to swallow all I had left of enjoyment upon earth!"

It was not until she had exhausted herself by these gloomy and restless
reflections, that she laid her head upon her pillow, and tried to sleep.
Morning usually dawned before she closed her eyes; and it was nearly
noon before she rose, weary and unrefreshed. It was with a struggle that
she commenced a new day--a day that was to be cheered by no event nor
feeling capable of animating her to any sense of joy. She had never
occupied herself by intellectual exertion: her employments had been the
cultivation of what are called accomplishments merely; and when now she
reverted to these, it was with bitterness. She remembered the interval
when she had been inspirited by the delightful wish to please Horatio.
Now none cared how the forlorn Cornelia passed her time;--no one would
hang enraptured on her voice, or hail with gladness the developement of
some new talent. "It is the same," she thought, "how I get rid of the
heavy hours, so that they go. I have but to give myself up to the
sluggish stream that bears me on to old age, not more bereft or
unregarded than these wretched years."

Thus she lingered idly through the morning; her only enjoyment being,
when she secured to herself a solitary drive, and reclining back in her
carriage, felt herself safe from every intrusion, and yet enjoying a
succession of objects, that a little varied the tenor of her thoughts.
She had deserted the park, and sought unfrequented drives in the
environs of London. Evening at last came, and with it her uninteresting
engagements, which yet she found better than entire seclusion. Forced to
rouse herself to adopt, as a mask, the smiling appearance which had been
natural to her for many years, she often abhorred every one around her;
and yet, hating herself more, took refuge among them, from her own
society. Her chief care was to repress any manifestation of her despair,
which too readily rose to her lips or in her eyes. The glorious hues of
sunset--the subduing sounds of music--even the sight of a beautiful
girl, resplendent with happiness and youth, moving gracefully in
dance--had power to move her to tears: her blood seemed to curdle and
grow thick, while gloomy shadows mantled over her features. Often, she
could scarcely forbear expressing the bitterness of her feelings, and
indulging in acrimonious remarks on the deceits of life, and the inanity
of all things. It seemed to her, sometimes, that she must die if she did
not give vent to the still increasing horror with which she regarded the
whole system of the world.

Nor were her sufferings always thus negative. One evening, especially, a
young travelled gentleman approached her, with all the satisfaction
painted on his countenance, which he felt at having secured a topic for
the entertainment of the fashionable Lady Lodore.

"You are intimate with the Misses Saville," he said; "what charming
girls they are! I have just left them at Naples, where they have been
spending the carnival. I saw them almost every day, and capitally we
enjoyed ourselves. Their Italian sister-in-law spirited them up to mask,
and to make a real carnival of it. A most lovely woman that. Did you
ever see Mrs. Saville, Lady Lodore?"

"Never," replied his auditress.

"Such eyes! Gazelles, and stars, and suns, and the whole range of poetic
imagery, might be sought in vain, to do justice to her large dark eyes.
She is very young--scarcely twenty: and to see her with her child, is
positively a finer tableau than any Raphael or Correggio in the world.
She has a little girl, not a year old, with golden hair, and eyes as
black as the mother's--the most beautiful little thing, and so
intelligent. Saville doats on it: no wonder--he is not himself handsome,
you know; though the lovely Clorinda would stab me if she heard me say
so. She positively adores him. You should have seen them together."

Lady Lodore turned on him one of her sweetest smiles, and in her blandest
tone, said, "If you could only get me an ice from that servant, who I see
immovable behind those dear, wonderful dowagers, you would so oblige
me."

He was gone in a minute; and on his return, Lady Lodore was so deeply
engrossed in being persuaded to go to the next drawing room, by the young
and new-married Countess of G--, that she could only reward him with
another heavenly smile. He was obliged to take his carnival at Naples to
some other listener.

Cornelia scarcely closed her eyes that night. The thought of the happy
wife and lovely child of Saville, pierced her as with remorse. She had
entirely broken off her acquaintance with his family, so that she was
ignorant of Clorinda's disposition, and readily fancied that she was as
happy as she believed that the wife of Horatio Saville must be. She
would not acknowledge that she was wicked enough to repine at her
felicity; but that he should be rendered happy by any other woman than
herself--that any other woman should have become the sharer of his
dearest affections, stung her to the core. Yet why should she regret?
She were well exchanged for one so lovely and so young. At the age of
thirty-four, which she had now reached, Cornelia persuaded herself, that
the name of beauty was a mockery as applied to her--though her own glass
might have told her otherwise; for time had dealt lightly with her, so
that the extreme fascination of her manner, and the animation and
intelligence of her countenance, made her compete with many younger
beauties. She felt that she was deteriorated from the angelic being she
had seemed when she first appeared as Lodore's bride; and this made all
compliments show false and vain. Now she figured to herself the dark
eyes of the Neapolitan; and easily believed that the memory of her would
contrast, like a faded picture, with the rich hues of Clorinda's face;
while her sad and withered feelings were in yet greater opposition to
the vivacity she had heard described and praised--to the triumphant and
glad feelings of a beloved wife. It seemed to her as if she must weep
for ever, and yet that tears were unavailing to diminish in any degree
the sorrow that weighed so heavily at her heart. These reflections sat
like a night-mare on her pillow, troubling the repose she in vain
courted. She arose in the morning, scarcely conscious that she had slept
at all--languid from exhaustion--her sufferings blunted by their very
excess.




CHAPTER IX


O, where have I been all this time? How 'friended
That I should lose myself thus desp'rately.
And none for pity show me how I wandered!

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


While it was yet too early for visitors, and before she had ordered
herself to be denied to every one, as she intended to do, she was
surprised by a double knock at the door, and she rang hastily to prevent
any one being admitted. The servants, with contradictory orders, found
it difficult to evade the earnest desire of the visitor to see their
lady; and at last they brought up a card, on which was written, "Miss
Derham wishes to be permitted to see Lady Lodore for Mrs. Villiers."
_From_ had first been written, erased, and _for_ substituted. Lady Lodore
was alarmed; and the ideas of danger and death instantly presenting
themselves, she desired Miss Derham to be shown up. She met her with a
face of anxiety, and with that frankness and kindness of manner which
was the irresistible sceptre she wielded to subdue all hearts. Fanny had
hitherto disliked Lady Lodore. She believed her to be cold, worldly, and
selfish--now, in a moment, she was convinced, by the powerful influence
of manner, that she was the contrary of all this; so that instead of the
chilling address she meditated, she was impelled to throw off her
reserve, and to tell her story with animation and detail. She spoke of
what Mrs. Villiers had gone through previous to the arrest of her
husband--and how constantly she had kept her resolve of remaining with
him--though her situation day by day becoming more critical, demanded
attentions and luxuries which she had no means of attaining. "Yet," said
Fanny, "I should not have intruded on you even now, but that they cannot
go on as they are; their resources are utterly exhausted,--and until
next June I see no prospect for them."

"Why does not Mr. Villiers apply to his father? even if letters were of
no avail, a personal appeal--"

"I am afraid that Colonel Villiers has
nothing to give," replied Fanny, "and at all events, Mr. Villiers's
imprisonment--"

"Prison!" cried Lady Lodore, "you do not mean--Ethel cannot be
living in prison!"

"They live within the rules, if you understand that term. They rent a
lodging close to the prison on the other side of the river."

"This must indeed be altered," said Lady Lodore, "this is far too
shocking--poor Ethel, she must come here! Dear Miss Derham, will you
tell her how much I desire to see her, and entreat her to make my house
her home."

Fanny shook head. "She will not leave her husband--I should make your
proposal in vain."

Lady Lodore looked incredulous. After a moment's thought she persuaded
herself that Ethel's having refused to return to the house of Mrs. Derham,
or having negatived some other proposed kindness originated this notion,
and she believed that she had only to make her invitation in the most
gracious possible way, not to have it refused. "I will go to Ethel
myself," she said; "I will myself bring her here, and so smooth all
difficulties."

Fanny did not object. Under her new favourable opinion of Lady Lodore, she
felt that all would be well if the mother and daughter were brought
together, though only for a few minutes. She wrote down Ethel's address,
and took her leave, while at the same moment Lady Lodore ordered her
carriage, and assured her that no time should be lost in removing Mrs.
Villiers to a more suitable abode.

Lady Lodore's feelings on this occasion were not so smiling as her looks.
She was grieved for her daughter, but she was exceedingly vexed for
herself. She had desired some interest, some employment in life, but she
recoiled from any that should link her with Ethel. She desired occupation,
and not slavery; but to bring the young wife to her own house, and make it
a home for her, was at once destructive of her own independence. She
looked forward with repugnance to the familiarity that must thence ensue
between her and Villiers. Even the first step was full of annoyance, and
she was displeased that Fanny had given her the task of going to her
daughter's habitation, and forced her to appear personally on so
degrading a scene; there was however no help--she had undertaken it, and
it must be done.

Every advance she made towards the wretched part of the town where Ethel
lived, added to her ill-humour. She felt almost personally affronted by
the necessity she was under of first coming in contact with her daughter
under such disastrous circumstances. Her spleen against Lord Lodore
revived: she viewed every evil that had ever befallen her, as arising from
his machinations. If Ethel had been entrusted to her guardianship, she
certainly had never become the wife of Edward Villiers--nor ever have
tasted the dregs of opprobrious poverty.

At length, her carriage drew near a row of low, shabby houses; and as
the name caught her eye she found that she had reached her destination.
She resolved not to see Villiers, if it could possibly be avoided; and
then making up her mind to perform her part with grace, and every show
of kindness, she made an effort to smooth her brow and recall her
smiles. The carriage stopped at a door--a servant-maid answered to the
knock. She ordered Mr. Villiers to be asked for; he was not at home. One
objection to her proceeding was removed by this answer. Mrs. Villiers
was in the house, and she alighted and desired to be shown to her.




CHAPTER X


As flowers beneath May's footsteps waken
As stars from night's loose hair are shaken;
As waves arise when loud winds call,
Thoughts sprung where'er that step did fall.

SHELLEY.


Never before had the elegant and fastidious Lady Lodore entered such an
abode, or ascended such stairs. The servant had told her to enter the room
at the head of the first flight, so she made her way by herself, and
knocked at the door. The voice that told her to come in, thrilled
through her, she knew not why, and she became disturbed at finding that
her self-possession was failing her. Slight things act powerfully on the
subtle mechanism of the human mind. She had dressed with scrupulous
plainness, yet her silks and furs were strangely contrasted with the
room she entered, and she felt ashamed of all the adjuncts of wealth and
luxury that attended her. She opened the door with an effort: Ethel was
seated near the fire at work--no place or circumstance could deteriorate
from her appearance--in her simple, unadorned morning-dress, she looked
as elegant and as distinguished as she had done when her mother had last
seen her in diamonds and plumes in the presence of royalty. There was
a charm about both, strikingly in contrast, and yet equal in
fascination--the polish of Lady Lodore, and the simplicity of Ethel were
both manifestations of inward grace and dignity; and as they now met, it
would have been difficult to say which had the advantage of the other.
Ethel's extreme youth, by adding to the interest with which she must be
regarded, was in her favour. Yet full of sensibility and loveliness as
was her face, she had never been, nor was she even now, as strikingly
beautiful as her mother.

Lady Lodore could not restrain the tear that started into her eye on
beholding her daughter situated as she was. Ethel's feelings, on the
contrary, were all gladness. She had no pride to allay her gratitude for
her mother's kindness. "How very good of you to come!" she said, "how could
you find out where we were?"

"How long have you been here?" asked Lady Lodore, looking round the
wretched little room.

"Only a few weeks--I assure you it is not so bad as it seems. I should
not much mind it, but that Edward feels it so deeply on my account."

"I do not wonder," said her mother, "he must be cut to the soul--but
thank God it is over now. You shall come to me immediately, my house is
quite large enough to accommodate you--I am come to fetch you."

"My own dearest mother!"--the words scarcely formed themselves on
Ethel's lips; she half feared to offend the lovely woman before her by
showing her a daughter's affection.

"Yes, call me mother," said Lady Lodore; "I may, at last, I hope, be
allowed to prove myself one. Come then, dear Ethel, you will not refuse my
request--you will come with me?"

"How gladly--but--will they let Edward go? I thought there was no hope
of so much good fortune."

"I fear indeed," replied her mother, "that Mr. Villiers must endure the
annoyance of remaining here a little longer; but I hope his affairs will
soon be arranged."

Ethel bent her large eyes inquiringly on her mother, as if not
understanding; and then, as her meaning opened on her, a smile diffused
itself over her countenance as she said, "Your intentions are the
kindest in the world--I am grateful, how far more grateful than I can at
all express, for your goodness. That you have had the kindness to come
to this odious place is more than I could ever dare expect."

"It is not worth your thanks, although I think I deserve your
acquiescence to my proposal. You will come home with me?"

Ethel shook her head, smilingly. "All my wishes are accomplished," she
said, "through this kind visit. I would not have you for the world come
here again; but the wall between us is broken down, and we shall not
become strangers again."

"My dearest Ethel," said Lady Lodore, seriously, "I see what you mean. I
wish Mr. Villiers were here to advocate my cause. You must come with me--he
will be much more at ease when you are no longer forced to share his
annoyances. This is in every way an unfit place for you, especially at
this time."

"I shall appear ungrateful, I fear," replied Ethel, "if I assure you how
much better off I am here than I could be any where else in the world.
This place appears miserable to you--so I dare say it is; to me it seems
to possess every requisite for happiness, and were it not so, I would
rather live in an actual dungeon with Edward, than in the most splendid
mansion in England, away from him."

Her face was lighted up with such radiance as she spoke--there was so
much fervour in her voice--such deep affection in her speaking
eyes--such an earnest demonstration of heartfelt sincerity, that Lady
Lodore was confounded and overcome. Swift, as if a map had been unrolled
before her, the picture of her own passed life was retraced in her
mind--its loneless and unmeaning pursuits--and the bitter disappointments
that had blasted every hope of seeing better days. She burst into tears.
Ethel was shocked and tried to soothe her by caresses and assurances of
gratitude and affection. "And yet you will not come with me?" said Lady
Lodore, making an effort to resume her self-command.

"I cannot. It is impossible for me voluntarily to separate myself from
Edward--I am too weak, too great a coward."

"And is there no hope of liberation for him?" This question of Lady
Lodore forced them back to matter-of-fact topics, and she became composed.
Ethel related how ineffectual every endeavour had yet been to arrange
his affairs, how large his debts, how inexorable his creditors, how
neglectful his attorney.

"And his father?" inquired her mother.

"He seems to me to be kind-hearted," replied Ethel, "and to feel deeply
his son's situation; but he has no means--he himself is in want."

"He is keeping a carriage at this moment in Paris," said Lady Lodore, "and
giving parties--however, I allow that that is no proof of his having
money. Still you must not stay here."

"Nor shall we always," replied Ethel; "something of course will happen
to take us away, though as yet it is all hopeless enough."

"Aunt Bessy, Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry, might give you assistance. Have
you asked her?--has she refused?"

"Edward has exacted a promise from me not to reveal our perplexities to
her--he is punctilious about money obligations, and I have given my word
not to hurt his delicacy on that point."

"Then that, perhaps, is the reason why you refused my request to go home
with me?" said Lady Lodore reproachfully.

"No," replied Ethel, "I do not think that he is so scrupulous as to
prevent a mother from serving her child, but he shall answer for
himself; I expect him back from his walk every minute."

"Then forgive me if I run away," said Lady Lodore; "I am not fit to see him
now. Better times will come, dearest Ethel, and we shall meet again. God
bless you, my child, as so much virtue and patience deserve to be blest.
Remember me with kindness."

"Do not you forget me," replied Ethel, "or rather, do not think of me
and my fortunes with too much disgust. We shall meet again, I hope?"

Lady Lodore kissed her, and hurried away. Scarcely was she in her carriage
than she saw Villiers advancing: his prepossessing appearance, ingenuous
countenance, and patrician figure, made more intelligible to her
world-practised eyes the fond fidelity of his wife. She drew up the
window that he might not see her, as she gave her directions for "home,"
and then retreating to the corner of her carriage, she tried to compose
her thoughts, and to reflect calmly on what was to be done.

But the effort was vain. The further she was removed from the strange
scene of the morning, the more powerfully did it act on, and agitate her
mind. Her soul was in tumults. This was the being she had pitied, almost
despised! Her eager imagination now exalted her into an angel. There was
something heart-moving in the gentle patience, and unrepining
contentment with which she bore her hard lot. She appeared in her eyes
to be one of those rare examples sent upon earth to purify human nature,
and to demonstrate how near akin to perfection we can become. Latent
maternal pride might increase her admiration, and maternal tenderness
add to its warmth. Her nature had acknowledged its affinity to her
child, and she felt drawn towards her with inexpressible yearnings. A
vehement desire to serve her sprung up--but all was confused and
tumultuous. She pressed her hand on her forehead, as if so to restrain
the strong current of thought. She compressed her lips, so to repress
her tears.

Arrived at home, she found herself in prison within the walls of her
chamber. She abhorred its gilding and luxury--she longed for Ethel's
scant abode and glorious privations. To alleviate her restlessness, she
again drove out, and directed her course through the Regent's Park, and
along the new road to Hampstead, where she was least liable to meet any
one she knew. It was one of the first fine days of spring. The green
meadows, the dark boughs swelling and bursting into bud, the fresh
enlivening air, the holiday of nature's birth--all this was lost on her,
or but added to her agitation. Still her thoughts were with her child in
her narrow abode; every lovely object served but to recall her image,
and the wafting of the soft breeze seemed an emanation from her. It was
dark before she came back, and sent a hurried note of excuse to the
house where she was to have dined. "No more, O never more," she cried,
"will I so waste my being, but learn from Ethel to be happy, and to
love."

Many thoughts and many schemes thronged her brain. Something must be
done, or her heart would burst. Pride, affection, repentance, all
occupied the same channel, and increased the flood that swept away every
idea but one. Her very love for Horatio, true and engrossing as it had
been, the source of many tears and endless regrets, appeared as slight
as the web of gossamer, compared to the chain that bound her to her
daughter. She could not herself understand, nor did she wish to know,
whence and why this enthusiasm had risen like an exhalation in her soul,
covering and occupying its entire space. She only knew it was there,
interpenetrating, paramount. Ethel's dark eyes and silken curls, her
sweet voice and heavenly smile, formed a moving, speaking picture, which
she felt that it were bliss to contemplate for ever. She retired at last
to bed, but not to rest; and as she lay with open eyes, thinking not of
sleep--alive in every pore--her brain working with ten thousand
thoughts, one at last grew more importunate than the rest, and demanded
all her attention. Her ideas became more consecutive, though not less
rapid and imperious. She drew forth in prospect, as it were, a map of
what was to be done, and the results. Her mind became fixed, and
sensations of ineffable pleasure accompanied her reveries. She was
resolved to sacrifice every thing to her daughter--to liberate Villiers,
and to establish her in ease and comfort. The image of self-sacrifice,
and of the ruin of her own fortunes, was attended with a kind of
rapture. She felt as if, in securing Ethel's happiness, she could never
feel sorrow more. This was something worth living for: the burden of
life was gone--its darkness dissipated--a soft light invested all
things, and angels' voices invited her to proceed. While indulging in
these reveries, she sunk into a balmy sleep--such a one she had not
enjoyed for many months--nay, her whole past life had never afforded her
so sweet a joy. The thoughts of love, when she believed that she should
be united to Saville, were not so blissful; for self-approbation,
derived from a consciousness of virtue and well-doing, hallowed every
thought.




CHAPTER XI


Like gentle rains on the dry plains,
Making that green which late was grey;
Or like the sudden moon, that stains
Some gloomy chamber's window panes,
With a broad light like day.

SHELLEY.


How mysterious a thing is the action of repentance in the human mind! We
will not dive into the debasing secrets of remorse for guilt. Lady Lodore
could accuse herself of none. Yet when she looked back, a new light shone
on the tedious maze in which she had been lost; a light--and she blessed
it--that showed her a pathway out of tempest and confusion into serenity
and peace. She wondered at her previous blindness; it was as if she had
closed her eyelids, and then fancied it was night. No fear that she
should return to darkness; her heart felt so light, her spirit so clear
and animated, that she could only wonder how it was she had missed
happiness so long, when it needed only that she should stretch out her
hand to take it.

Her first act on the morrow was to have an interview with her
son-in-law's solicitor. Nothing could be more hopeless than Mr.
Gayland's representation of his client's affairs. The various deeds of
settlement and entail, through which he inherited his estate, were
clogged in such a manner as to render an absolute sale of his
reversionary prospects impossible, so that the raising of money on them
could only be effected at an immense future sacrifice. Under these
circumstances Gayland had been unwilling to proceed, and appeared
lukewarm and dilatory, while he was impelled by that love for the
preservation of property, which often finds place in the mind of a legal
adviser.

Lady Lodore listened attentively to his statements. She asked the extent of
Edward's debts, and somewhat started at the sum named as necessary to
clear him. She then told Mr. Gayland that their ensuing conversation
must continue under a pledge of secrecy on his part. He assented, and
she proceeded to represent her intention of disposing of her jointure
for the purpose of extricating Villiers from his embarrassments. She
gave directions for its sale, and instructions for obtaining the
necessary papers to effect it. Mr. Gayland's countenance brightened; yet
he offered a few words of remonstrance against such unexampled
generosity.

"The sacrifice," said Lady Lodore, "is not so great as you imagine. A
variety of circumstances tend to compensate me for it. I do not depend upon
this source of income alone; and be assured, that what I do, I consider, on
the whole, as benefiting me even more than Mr. Villiers."

Mr. Gayland bowed; and Cornelia returned home with a light heart. For
months she had not felt such an exhilaration of spirits. A warm joy
thrilled through her frame, and involuntary smiles dimpled her cheeks.
Dusky and dingy as was the day, the sunshine of her soul dissipated its
shadows, and spread brightness over her path. She could scarcely
controul the expression of her delight; and when she sat down to write
to Ethel, it was several minutes before she was able to collect her
thoughts, so as to remember what she had intended to say. Two notes were
destroyed before she had succeeded in imparting that sobriety to her
expressions, which was needful to veil her purpose, which she had
resolved to lock within her own breast for ever. At length she was
obliged to satisfy herself with a few vague expressions. This was her
letter:--


"I cannot help believing, my dearest girl, that your trials are coming
to a conclusion. I have seen Mr. Gayland; and it appears to me that
energy and activity are chiefly wanting for the arrangement of your
husband's affairs: I think I have in some degree inspired these. He has
promised to write to Mr. Villiers, who, I trust, will find satisfaction
in his views. Do you, my dearest Ethel, keep up your spirits, and take
care of your precious health. We shall meet again in better days, when
you will be rewarded for your sufferings and goodness. Believe me, I
love as much as I admire you; so, in spite of the past, think of me with
indulgence and affection."


Lady Lodore dressed to dine out, and for an evening assembly. She looked so
radiant and so beautiful, that admiration and compliments were showered
upon her. How vain and paltry they all seemed; and yet her feelings were
wholly changed from that period, when she desired to reject and scoff at
the courtesy of her fellow-creatures. The bitterness of spirit was gone,
which had prompted her to pour out gall and sarcasm, and had made it her
greatest pleasure to revel in the contempt and hate that filled her
bosom towards herself and others. She was now at peace with the world,
and disposed to view its follies charitably. Yet how immeasurably
superior she felt herself to all those around her! not through vanity or
supercilious egotism, but from the natural spring of inward joy and
self-approbation, which a consciousness of doing well opened in her
before dried-up heart. She somewhat contemned her friends, and wholly
pitied them. But she could not dwell on any disagreeable sentiment. Her
thoughts, while she reverted to the circumstances that so changed their
tenor, were stained with the fairest hues, harmonized by the most
delicious music. She had risen to a sphere above, beyond the ordinary
soarings of mortals--a world without a cloud, without one ungenial
breath. She wondered at herself. She looked back with mingled horror and
surprise on the miserable state of despondence to which she had been
reduced. Where were now her regrets?--where her ennui, her repinings,
her despair? "In the deep bosom of the ocean buried!"--and she arose, as
from a second birth, to new hopes, new prospects, new feelings; or
rather to another state of being, which had no affinity to the former.
For poverty was now her pursuit, obscurity her desire, ruin her hope;
and she smiled on, and beckoned to these, as if life possessed no
greater blessings.

Her impetuosity and pride served to sustain the high tone of her soul.
She had none of that sloth of purpose, or weakness of feeling, that
leads to hesitation and regret. To resolve with her had been, during the
whole course of her life, to do; and what her mind was set upon she
accomplished--it might be rashly, but still with that independence and
energy, that gave dignity even to her more ambiguous actions. As before,
when she cast off Lodore, she had never admitted a doubt that she was
justified before God and her conscience for refusing to submit to the
most insulting tyranny; so now, believing that she had acted ill in not
demanding the guardianship of her daughter, and resolving to atone for
the evils which were the consequence of this neglect of duty on her
part, she had no misgivings as to the future, but rushed precipitately
onwards. As a racer at the Olympic games, she panted to arrive at the
goal, though it were only to expire at the moment of its attainment.

Meanwhile, Ethel had been enchanted by her mother's visit, and spoke of
it to Villiers as a proof of the real goodness of her heart, insisting
that she was judged harshly and falsely. Villiers smiled incredulously.
"She gains your esteem at an easy rate," he observed; "cultivate it, if
it makes you happier. It will need more than a mere act of ordinary
courtesy--more than a slight invitation to her house, to persuade me
that Lady Lodore is not--what she is--a worshipper of the world, a
frivolous, unfeeling woman. Mark me whether she comes again."

Her letter, on the following day, strengthened his opinion. "This is
even insulting," he said: "she takes care to inform you that she will
not look again on your poverty, but will wait for _better days_ to bring
you together. The kindness of such an intimation is quite admirable. She
has inspired Gayland with energy and activity!--O, then, she must be a
Medea, in more senses than the more obvious one."

Ethel looked reproachfully. She saw that Villiers was deeply hurt that
Lady Lodore had become acquainted with their distresses, and been a witness
of the nakedness of the land. She could not inspire him with the tenderness
that warmed her heart towards her mother, and the conviction she
entertained, in spite of appearances, (for she was forced to confess to
herself that Lady Lodore's letter was not exactly the one she expected,)
that her heart was generous and affectionate. It was a comfort to her
that Fanny Derham participated in her opinions. Fanny was quite sure
that Lady Lodore would prove herself worthy of the esteem she had so
suddenly conceived for her; and Ethel listened delightedly to her
assertions--it was so soothing to think well of, to love, and praise her
mother.

The solicitor's letter, which came, as Lady Lodore announced, somewhat
surprised Villiers; yet, after a little reflection, he gave no heed to
its contents. It said, that upon further consideration of particular
points, Gayland perceived certain facilities; by improving upon which,
he hoped soon to make a favourable arrangement, and to extricate Mr.
Villiers from his involvements. Any thing so vague demanded explanation.
Edward wrote earnestly, requesting one; but his letter remained
unanswered. Perplexed and annoyed, he obtained permission to quit his
bounds for a few hours, and called upon the man of law. Gayland was so
busy, that he could not afford him more than five minutes' conversation.
He said that he had hopes--even expectations; that a little time would
show more; and he begged his client to be patient. Villiers returned in
despair. The only circumstance that at all served to inspire him with
any hope, was, that on the day succeeding to his visit, he received a
remittance of an hundred pounds from Gayland, who begged to be
considered as his banker till the present negociations should be
concluded.

There was some humiliation in the knowledge of how welcome this supply
had become, and Ethel used her gentle influence to mitigate the pain of
such reflections. If she ever drooped, it was not for herself, but for
Villiers; and she carefully hid even these disinterested repinings. Her
own condition did not inspire her with any fears, and the anxiety that
she experienced for her unborn child was untinctured by bitterness or
despair. She felt assured that their present misfortunes would be of
short duration; and instead of letting her thoughts dwell on the
mortifications or shame that marked the passing hour, she loved to fill
her mind with pleasing sensations, inspired by the tenderness of her
husband, the kindness of poor Fanny, and the reliance she had in the
reality of her mother's affection. In vain, she said, did the harsher
elements of life try to disturb the serenity which the love of those
around her produced in her soul. Her happiness was treasured in their
hearts, and did not emanate from the furniture of a room, nor the
comfort of an equipage. Her babe, if destined to open its eyes first on
such a scene, would be still less acted upon by its apparent
cheerlessness. Cradled in her arms, and nourished at her bosom, what
more benign fate could await the little stranger? What was there in
their destiny worthy of grief, while they remained true to each other?

With such arguments she tried to inspire Villiers with a portion of that
fortitude and patience which was a natural growth in herself. They had
but slender effect upon him. Their different educations had made her
greatly his superior in these virtues; besides that she, with her
simpler habits and unprejudiced mind, was less shocked by the
concomitants of penury, than he, bred in high notions of aristocratic
exclusiveness. She had spent her youth among settlers in a new country,
and did not associate the idea of disgrace with want. Nakedness and
gaunt hunger had often been the invaders of her forest home, scarcely to
be repelled by her father's forethought and resources. How could she
deem these shameful, when they had often assailed the most worthy and
industrious, who were not the less regarded or esteemed on that account.
She had acquired a practical philosophy, while inhabiting the western
wilderness, and beholding the vast variety of life that it presents,
which stood her in good stead under her European vicissitudes. The white
inhabitants of America did not form her only school. The Red Indian and
his squaw were also human beings, subject to the same necessities,
moved, in the first instance, by the same impulses as herself. All that
bore the human form were sanctified to her by the spirit of sympathy;
and she could not, as Edward did, feel herself wholly outcast and under
ban, while kindness, however humble, and intelligence, however lowly,
attended upon her.

Villiers could not yield to her arguments, nor partake her wisdom; yet
he was glad that she possessed any source of consolation, however
unimaginable by himself. He buried within his heart the haughty sense of
wrong. He uttered no complaint, though his whole being rebelled against
the state of inaction to which he was reduced. It maddened him to feel
that he could not stir a finger to help himself, even while he fancied
that he saw his young wife withering before his eyes; and looked forward
to the birth of his child, under circumstances, that rendered even the
necessary attendance difficult, if not impracticable. The heaviest
weight of slavery fell upon him, for it was he that was imprisoned, and
forbidden to go beyond certain limits; and though Ethel religiously
confined herself within yet narrower bounds than those allotted to him,
he only saw, in this delicacy, another source of evil. Nor were these
real tangible ills those which inflicted the greatest pain. Had these
misfortunes visited him in the American wilderness, or in any part of
the world where the majesty of nature had surrounded them, he fancied
that he should have been less alive to their sinister influence. But
here shame was conjoined with the perpetual spectacle of the least
reputable class of the civilized community. Their walks were haunted by
men who bore the stamp of profligacy and crime; and the very shelter of
their dwelling was shared by the mean and vulgar. His aristocratic pride
was sorely wounded at every turn;--not for himself so much, for he was
manly enough to feel "that a man's a man for all that,"--but for Ethel's
sake, whom he would have fondly placed apart from all that is deformed
and unseemly, guarded even from the rougher airs of heaven, and
surrounded by every thing most luxurious and beautiful in the world.

There was no help. Now and then he got a letter from his father, full of
unmeaning apologies and unmanly complaints. The more irretrievable his
poverty became, the firmer grew his resolve not to burden with his wants
any more distant relation. He would readily give up every prospect of
future wealth to purchase ease and comfort for Ethel; but he could not
bend to any unworthy act; and the harder he felt pressed upon and
injured by fortune, the more jealously he maintained his independence of
feeling; on that he would lean to the last, though it proved a sword to
pierce him.

He looked forward with despair, yet he tried to conceal his worst
thoughts, which would still be brooding upon absolute want and
starvation. He answered Ethel's cheering tones in accents of like cheer,
and met the melting tenderness of her gaze with eyes that spoke of love
only. He endeavoured to persuade her that he did not wholly shut his
heart from the hopes she was continually presenting to him. Hopes, the
very names of which were mockery. For they must necessarily be embodied
in words and ideas--and his father or uncle were mentioned--the one had
proved a curse, the other a temptation. He could trace his reverses as
to the habits of expence and the false views of his resources, acquired
under Lord Maristow's tutelage, as to the prodigality and neglect of his
parent. Even the name of Horatio Saville produced bitterness. Why was
he not here? He would not intrude his wants upon him in his Italian
home; but had he been in England, they had been saved from these worst
blows of fate.

The only luxury of Villiers was to steal some few hours of solitude,
when he could indulge in his miserable reflections without restraint.
The loveliness and love of Ethel were then before his imagination to
drive him to despair. To suffer alone would have been nothing; but to
see this child of beauty and tenderness, this fairest nursling of nature
and liberty, droop and fade in their narrow, poverty-striken home, bred
thoughts akin to madness. During each live-long night he was kept awake
by the anguish of such reflections. Darker thoughts sometimes intruded
themselves. He fancied that if he were dead, Ethel would be happier. Her
mother, his relations, each and all would come forward to gift her with
opulence and ease. The idea of self-destruction thus became soothing;
and he pondered with a kind of savage pleasure on the means by which he
should end the coil of misery that had wound round him.

At such times the knowledge of Ethel's devoted affection checked him. Or
sometimes, as he gazed on her as she lay sleeping at his side, he felt
that every sorrow was less than that which separation must produce; and
that to share adversity with her was greater happiness than the
enjoyment of prosperity apart from her. Once, when brought back from the
gloomiest desperation by such a return of softer emotions, the words of
Francesca da Rimini rushed upon his mind and completed the change. He
recollected how she and her lover were consoled by their eternal
companionship in the midst of the infernal whirlwind. "And do I love you
less, my angel?" he thought; "are you not more dear to me than woman
ever was to man, and would I divide myself from you because we suffer?
Perish the thought! Whether for good or ill, let our existences still
continue one, and from the sanctity and sympathy of our union, a sweet
will be extracted, sufficient to destroy the bitterness of this hour. We
prefer remaining together, mine own sweet love, for ever together,
though it were for an eternity of pain. And these woes are finite. Your
pure and exalted nature will be rewarded for its sufferings, and I, for
your sake, shall be saved. I could not live without you in this world;
and yet with insane purpose I would rush into the unknown, away from
you, leaving you to seek comfort and support from other hands than mine.
I was base and cowardly to entertain the thought, but for one moment--a
traitor to my own affection, and the stabber of your peace. Ah, dearest
Ethel, when in a few hours your eyes will open on the light, and seek me
as the object most beloved by them, were I away, unable to return their
fondness, incapable of the blessing of beholding them, what hell could
be contrived to punish more severely my dereliction of duty?"

With this last thought another train of feeling was introduced, and he
strung himself to more manly endurance. He saw that his post was
assigned him in this world, and that he ought to fulfil its duties with
courage and patience. Hope came hand in hand with such ideas--and the
dawn of content on his soul was a proof that the exercise of virtue
brought with it its own reward. He could not always keep his feelings in
the same tone, but he no longer saw greatness of mind in the indulgence
of sorrow.

He remembered that throughout the various stations into which society
has divided human beings, adversity and pain belong to each, and that
death and treachery are more frightful evils than all the hardships of
life. He thought of his unborn child, and of his duties towards it--not
only in a worldly point of view, but as its teacher and guide in morals
and religion. The beauty and use of the ties of blood, to which his
peculiar situation had hitherto blinded him, became intelligible at once
to his heart and his understanding; and while he felt how ill his father
had fulfilled the paternal duties, he resolved that his own offspring
should never have cause to reproach him for similar misconduct. Before
he had repined because the evils of his lot seemed gratuitous suffering;
but now he felt, as Ethel had often expressed it, that the sting of
humiliation is taken from misfortune, when we nerve ourselves to endure
it for another's sake.




CHAPTER XII


The world had just begun to steal
Each hope that led me lightly on,
I felt not as I used to feel,
And life grew dark and love was gone.

THOMAS MOORE.


While the young pair were thus struggling with the severe visitation of
adversity, Lady Lodore was earnestly engaged in her endeavours to extricate
them from their difficulties. The ardour of her zeal had made her take
the first steps in this undertaking, with a resolution that would not
look behind, and a courage not to be dismayed by the dreary prospect
which the future afforded. The scheme which she had planned, and was now
proceeding to execute, was unbounded in generosity and self-sacrifice.
It was not in her nature to stop short at half-measures, nor to pause
when once she had fixed her purpose. If she ever trembled on looking
forward to the utter ruin she was about to encounter, her second emotion
was to despise herself for such pusillanimity, and to be roused to
renewed energy. She intended to devote as much as was necessary of the
money arising from the sale of her jointure, as fixed by her marriage
settlement, for the liquidation of her son-in-law's debts. The remaining
six hundred a-year, bequeathed to her in Lord Lodore's will, under
circumstances of cruel insult, she resolved to give up to her daughter's
use, for her future subsistence. She hoped to save enough from the sum
produced by the disposal of her jointure, to procure the necessaries of
life for a few years, and she did not look beyond. She would quit London
for ever. She must leave her house, which she had bought during her days
of prosperity, and which she had felt so much pride and delight in
adorning with every luxury and comfort: to crown her good work, she
intended to give it up to Ethel. And then with her scant means she would
take refuge in the solitude where Lodore found her, and spend the
residue of her days among the uncouth and lonely mountains of Wales, in
poverty and seclusion. It was from no agreeable association with her
early youth, that she selected the neighbourhood of Rhaider Gowy for her
future residence; nor from a desire of renewing the recollections of the
period spent there, nor of revisiting the scenes, where she had stepped
beyond infancy into the paths of life. Her choice simply arose from
being obliged to think of economy in its strictest sense, and she
remembered this place as the cheapest in the world, and the most
retired. Besides, that in fixing on a part of the country which she had
before inhabited, and yet where she would be utterly unknown, the idea
of her future home assumed distinctness, and a greater sense of
practicability was imparted to her schemes, than could have been the
case, had she been unable to form any image in her mind of the exact
spot whither she was about to betake herself.

The first conception of this plan had dawned on her soul, as the design
of some sublime poem or magnificent work of art may present itself to
the contemplation of the poet and man of genius. She dwelt on it in its
entire result, with a glow of joy; she entered into its details with
childish eagerness. She pictured to herself the satisfaction of Villiers
and Ethel at finding themselves suddenly, as by magic, restored to
freedom and the pleasures of life. She figured their gladness in
exchanging their miserable lodging for the luxury of her elegant
dwelling; their pleasure in forgetting the long train of previous
misfortunes, or remembering them only to enhance their prosperity, when
pain and fear, disgrace and shame, should be exchanged for security and
comfort. She repeated to herself, "I do all this--I, the despised
Cornelia! I who was deemed unworthy to have the guardianship of my own
child. I, who was sentenced to desertion and misery, because I was too
worldly and selfish to be worthy of Horace Saville! How little through
life has my genuine character been known, or its qualities appreciated!
Nor will it be better understood now. My sacrifices will continue a
mystery, and even the benefits I am forced to acknowledge to flow from
me, I shall diminish in their eyes, by bestowing them with apparent
indifference. Will they ever deign to discover the reality under the
deceitful appearances which it will be my pride to exhibit? I care not;
conscience will approve me--and when I am alone and unthought of, the
knowledge that Ethel is happy through my means will make poverty a
blessing."

It was not pride alone that induced Lady Lodore to resolve on concealing
the extent of her benefits. All that she could give was not much if
compared with the fortunes of the wealthy--but it was a competence, which
would enable her daughter and her husband to expect better days with
patience; but if they knew how greatly she was a sufferer for their good,
they would insist at least upon her sharing their income--and what was
scanty in its entireness, would be wholly insufficient when divided.
Villiers also might dispute or reject her kindness, and deeply injured as
she believed herself to have been by him--injured by his disesteem, and the
influence he had used over Saville, in a manner so baneful to her
happiness, she felt irrepressible exultation at the idea of heaping
obligation on him,--and knowing herself to be deserving of his deepest
gratitude. All these sentiments might be deemed fantastic, or at least
extravagant. Yet her conclusions were reasonable, for it was perfectly
true that Villiers would rather have returned to his prison, than have
purchased freedom at the vast price she was about to pay for it. No, her
design was faultless in its completeness, meagre and profitless if she
stopt short of its full execution. Nor would she see Ethel again in the
interim--partly fearful of not preserving her secret inviolate--partly
because she felt so strongly drawn towards her, that she dreaded finding
herself the slave of an affection--a passion, which, under her
circumstances, she could not indulge. Without counsellor, without one
friendly voice to encourage, she advanced in the path she had marked
out, and drew from her own heart only the courage to proceed.

It required, however, all her force of character to carry her forward. A
thousand difficulties were born at every minute, and the demands made
were increased to such an extent as to make it possible that they would
go beyond her means of satisfying them. She had not the assistance of
one friend acquainted with the real state of things to direct her--her
only adviser was a man of law, who did what he was directed--not indeed
with passive obedience, but whose deviations from mere acquiescence,
arose from technical objections and legal difficulties, at once
unintelligible and tormenting.

Besides these more palpable annoyances, other clouds arose, natural to
wavering humanity, which would sometimes shadow Cornelia's soul, so that
she drooped from the height she had reached, with a timid and dejected
spirit. At first she looked forward to ruin, exile, and privation, as to
possessions which she coveted--but the further she proceeded, the more
she lost view of the light and gladness which had attended on the dawn
of her new visions. Futurity became enveloped in an appalling obscurity,
while the present was sad and cheerless. The ties which she had formed
in the world, which she had fancied it would be so easy to cut asunder,
assumed strength; and she felt that she must endure many pangs in the
act of renouncing them for ever. The scenes and persons which, a little
while ago, she had regarded as uninteresting and frivolous--she was now
forced to acknowledge to be too inextricably interwoven with her habits
and pursuits, to be all at once quitted without severe pain. When the
future was spoken of by others with joyous anticipation, her heart sunk
within her, to think how her hereafter was to become disjointed and cast
away from all that had preceded it. The mere pleasures of society grew
into delights, when thought of as about to become unattainable; and
slight partialities were regarded as if founded upon strong friendship
and tender affection. She was not aware till now how habit and
association will endear the otherwise indifferent, and how the human
heart, prone to love, will entwine its ever-sprouting tendrils around
any object, not absolutely repulsive, which is brought into near contact
with it. When any of her favourites addressed her in cordial tones, when
she met the glance of one she esteemed, directed towards her with an
expression of kindliness and sympathy, her eyes grew dim, and a thrill
of anguish passed through her frame. All that she had a little while ago
scorned as false and empty, she now looked upon as the pleasant reality
of life, which she was to exchange for she scarcely knew what--a living
grave, a friendless desart--for silence and despair.

It is a hard trial at all times to begin the world anew, even when we
exchange a mediocre station for one which our imagination paints as full
of enjoyment and distinction. How much more difficult it was for Lady to
despoil herself of every good, and voluntarily to encounter poverty in
its most unadorned guise. As time advanced, she became fully aware of
what she would have to go through, and her heroism was the greater,
because, though the charm had vanished, and no hope of compensation or
reward was held out, she did not shrink from accomplishing her task. She
could not exactly say, like old Adam in the play,


At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore it is too late a week.


Yet at her age it was perhaps more difficult to cast off the goods of this
world, than at a more advanced one. Midway in life, we are not weaned
from affections and pleasures--we still hope. We even demand more of
solid advantages, because the romantic ideas of youth have disappeared,
and yet we are not content to give up the game. We no longer set our
hearts on ephemeral joys, but require to be enabled to put our trust in
the continuance of any good offered to our choice. This desire of
durability in our pleasures is equally felt by the young; but ardour of
feeling and ductility of imagination is then at hand to bestow a
quality, so dear and so unattainable to fragile humanity, on any object
we desire should be so gifted. But at a riper age we pause, and seek
that our reason may be convinced, and frequently prefer a state of
prosperity less extatic and elevated, because its very sobriety
satisfies us that it will not slip suddenly from our grasp.

The comforts of life, the esteem of friends--these are things which we
then regard with the greatest satisfaction; and other feelings, less
reasonable, yet not less keenly felt, may enter into the circle of
sensations, which forms the existence of a beautiful woman. It is less
easy for one who has been all her life admired and waited upon, to give
up the few last years of such power, than it would have been to cast
away the gift in earlier life. She has learned to doubt her influence,
to know its value, and to prize it. In girlhood it may be matter of mere
triumph--in after years it will be looked on as an inestimable quality
by which she may more easily and firmly secure the benevolence of her
fellow-creatures. All this depends upon the polish of the skin and the
fire of the eye, which a few years will deface and quench--and while the
opprobrious epithet of old woman approaches within view, she is glad to
feel secure from its being applied to her, by perceiving the signs of
the influence of her surviving attractions marked in the countenances of
her admirers. Lady Lodore never felt so kindly inclined towards hers, as now
that she was about to withdraw from them. Their admiration, for its own
sake, she might contemn, but she valued it as the testimony that those
charms were still hers, which once had subdued the soul of him she
loved--and this was no disagreeable assurance to one who was on the eve
of becoming a grandmother.

Her sensibility, awakened by the considerations forced on her by her new
circumstances, caused her to make more progress in the knowledge of
life, and in the philosophy of its laws, than love or ambition had ever
done before. The last had rendered her proud from success, the first had
caused her to feel dependent on one only; but now that she was about to
abandon all, she found herself bound to all by stronger ties than she
could have imagined. She became aware that any new connexion could never
be adorned by the endearing recollections attending those she had
already formed. The friends of her youth, her mere acquaintances, she
regarded with peculiar partiality, as being the witnesses or sharers of
her past joys and successes. Each familiar face was sanctified in her
eyes by association; and she walked among those whom she had so lately
scorned, as if they were saintly memorials to be approached with awe,
and quitted with eternal regret. Her hopes and prospects had hinged upon
them, but her life became out of joint when she quitted them. Her
sensitive nature melted in unwonted tenderness while occupied by such
contemplations, and they turned the path, she had so lately entered as
one of triumph and gladness, to gloom and despondence.

Sometimes she pondered upon means for preserving her connexion with the
world. But any scheme of that kind was fraught, on the one hand, with
mortification to herself, on the other, with the overthrow of her
designs, through the repugnance which Ethel and her husband would feel
at occasioning such unmeasured sacrifices. She often regretted that
there were no convents, to which she might retire with safety and
dignity. Conduct, such as she contemplated pursuing, would, under the
old regime in France, have been recompensed by praise and gratitude;
while its irrevocability must prevent any resistance to her wishes. In
giving up fortune and station, she would have placed herself under the
guardianship of a community; and have found protection and security, to
compensate for poverty and slavery. The very reverse of all this must
now happen. Alone, friendless, unknown, and therefore despised, she must
shift for herself, and rely on her own resources for prudence to insure
safety, and courage to endure the evils of her lot. To one of another
sex, the name of loneliness can never convey the idea of desolation and
disregard, which gives it so painful a meaning in a woman's mind. They
have not been taught always to look up to others, and to do nothing for
themselves; so that business becomes a matter of heroism to a woman,
when conducted in the most common-place way; but when it is accompanied
by mystery, she feels herself transported from her fitting place, and as
if about to encounter shame and contumely. Lady Lodore had never been
conversant with any mode of life, except that of being waited on and
watched over. In the poverty of her early girlhood, her mother had been
constantly at her side. The necessity of so conducting herself as to
prevent the shadow of slander from visiting her, had continued this
state of dependence during all her married life. She had never stept
across a street without attendance; nor put on her gloves, but as
brought to her by a servant. Her look had commanded obedience, and her
will had been law with those about her. This was now to be altered. She
scarcely reverted in her mind to these minutiæ; and when she did, it
was to smile at herself for being able to give weight to such trifles.
She was not aware how, hereafter, these small things would become the
shapings and embodyings which desertion and penury would adopt, to sting
her most severely. The new course she was about to enter, was too
unknown to make her fears distinct. There was one vast blank before her,
one gigantic and mishapen image of desertion, which filled her mind to
the exclusion of every other, but whose parts were not made out, though
this very indistinctness was the thing that often chiefly appalled her.

She said, with the noble exile,[2]--


"I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now."


It is true that she had not, like him,
to lament that--


"My native English, now I must forego;"


but there is
another language, even more natural than the mere dialect in which we
have been educated. When our lips no longer utter the sentiments of our
heart--when we are forced to exchange the spontaneous effusions of the
soul for cramped and guarded phrases, which give no indication of the
thought within,--then, indeed, may we say, that our tongue becomes



. . . "an unstringed viol, or a harp,
. . . . . . put into his hands,
That knows no touch to tune the harmony."


And this was to be Lady Lodore's position. Her only companions would be
villagers; or, at best, a few Welsh gentry, with whom she could have no
real communication. Sympathy, the charm of life, was dead for her, and
her state of banishment would be far more complete than if mountains and
seas only constituted its barriers.

Lady Lodore was often disturbed by these reflections, but she did not on
that account waver in her purpose. The flesh might shrink, but the spirit
was firm. Sometimes, indeed, she wondered how it was that she had first
conceived the design, which had become the tyrant of her life. She had
long known that she had a daughter, young, lovely, and interesting,
without any great desire to become intimate with her. Sometimes pride,
sometimes indignation, had checked her maternal feelings. The only time
before, in which she had felt any emotion similar to that which now
governed her, was on the day when she had spoken to her in the House of
Lords. But instead of indulging it, she had fled from it as an enemy,
and despised herself as a dupe, for being for one instant its subject.
When her fingers then touched her daughter's cheek, she had not trembled
like Ethel; yet an awful sensation passed through her frame, which for a
moment stunned her, and she hastily retreated, to recover herself. Now,
on the contrary, she longed to strain her child to her heart; she
thought no sacrifice too great, which was to conduce to her advantage;
and that she condemned herself never to see her more, appeared the
hardest part of the lot she was to undergo. Why was this change? She
could not tell--memory could not inform her. She only knew that since
she had seen Ethel in her adversity, the stoniness of her heart had
dissolved within her, that her whole being was subdued to tenderness,
and that the world was changed from what it had been in her eyes. She
felt that she could not endure life, unless for the sake of benefiting
her child; and that this sentiment mastered her in spite of herself, so
that every struggle with it was utterly vain.

Thus if she sometimes repined at the hard fate that drove her into
exile, yet she never wavered in her intentions; and in the midst of
regret, a kind of exultation was born, which calmed her pain. Smiles sat
upon her features, and her voice was attuned to cheerfulness. The
new-sprung tenderness of her soul imparted a fascination to her manner
far more irresistible than that to which tact and polish had given rise.
She was more kind and affectionate, and, above all, more sincere, and
therefore more winning. Every one felt, though none could divine the
cause of, this change. It was remarked that she was improved: some
shrewdly suspected that she was in love. And so she was--with an object
more enchanting than any earthly lover. For the first time she knew and
loved the Spirit of good and beauty, an affinity to which affords the
greatest bliss that our nature can receive.


[Footnote 2: Richard II.]




CHAPTER XIII


It is the same, for be it joy or sorrow.
The path of its departure still is free;
Man's yesterday can ne'er be like his morrow,
Nor aught endure save mutability.

SHELLEY.


The month of June had commenced. In spite of lawyer's delays and the
difficulties attendant on all such negociations, they were at last
concluded, and nothing remained but for Lady to sign the paper which was
to consign her to comparative destitution. In all changes we feel most
keenly the operation of small circumstances, and are chiefly depressed
by the necessity of stooping to the direction of petty arrangements, and
having to deal with subordinate persons. To complete her design, Lady
Lodore had to make many arrangements, trivial yet imperative, which
called for her attention, when she was least fitted to give it. She had
met these demands on her patience without shrinking; and all was
prepared for the finishing stroke about to be put to her plans. She
dismissed those servants whom she did not intend to leave in the house
for Ethel's use. She contrived to hasten the intended marriage of her
own maid, so to disburthen herself wholly. The mode by which she was,
solitary and unknown, to reach the mountains of Wales, without creating
suspicion, or leaving room for conjecture, was no easy matter. In human
life, one act is born of another, so that any one that disjoins itself
from the rest, instantly gives rise to curiosity and inquiry. Lady
Lodore, though fertile in expedients, was almost foiled: the eligibility
of having one confidant pressed itself upon her. She thought of Fanny
Derham; but her extreme youth, and her intimacy with Mrs. Villiers,
which would have necessitated many falsehoods, so to preserve the
secret, deterred her: she determined at last to trust to herself alone.
She resolved to take with her one servant only, who had not been long in
her service, and to dismiss him immediately after leaving London.
Difficulties presented themselves on every side; but she believed that
they could be best surmounted by obviating them in succession as they
arose, and that any fixed artificial plan would only tend to embarrass,
while a simple mode of proceeding would continue unquestioned.

Her chief art consisted in not appearing to be making any change at all.
She talked of a visit of two or three months to Emms, and mentioned her
intention of lending her house, during the interval, to her daughter.
She thus secured to herself a certain period during which no curiosity
would be exicited; and after a month or two had passed away, she would
be utterly forgotten:--thus she reasoned; and whether it were a real
tomb that she entered, or the living grave which she anticipated, her
name and memory would equally vanish from the earth, and she be thought
of no more. If Ethel ever entertained a wish to see her, Villiers would
be at hand to check and divert it. Who else was there to spend a thought
upon her? Alone upon earth, no friendly eye, solicitous for her welfare,
would seek to penetrate the mystery in which she was about to envelope
herself.

The day came, it was the second of June, when every preliminary was
accomplished. She had signed away all that she possessed--she had done
it with a smile--and her voice was unfaltering. The sum which she had
saved for herself consisted of but a few hundred pounds, on which she
was to subsist for the future. Again she enforced his pledge of secrecy
on Mr. Gayland; and glad that all was over, yet heavy at heart in spite
of her gladness, she returned to her home, which in a few hours she was
to quit for ever.

During all this time, her thoughts had seldom reverted to Saville. Hope
was dead, and the regrets of love had vanished with it. That he would
approve her conduct, was an idea that now and then flashed across her
mind; but he would remain in eternal ignorance, and therefore it could
not bring their thoughts into any communion. Whether he came to England,
or remained at Naples, availed her nothing. No circumstance could add
to, or diminish, the insuperable barrier which his marriage placed
between them.

She returned home from her last interview with Mr. Gayland: it was four
o'clock in the day; at six she had appointed Fanny Derham to call on
her; and an hour afterwards, the horses were ordered to be at the door,
which were to convey her away.

She became strangely agitated. She took herself to task for her
weakness; but every moment disturbed yet more the calm she was so
anxious to attain. She walked through the rooms of the house she had
dwelt in for so many years. She looked on the scene presented from her
windows. The drive in Hyde Park was beginning to fill with carriages and
equestrians, to be thronged with her friends whom she was never again to
see. Deep sadness crept over her mind. Her uncontrollable thoughts, by
some association of ideas, which she could not disentangle--brought
before her the image of Lodore, with more vividness than it had possessed
for years. A kind of wish to cross the Atlantic, and to visit the scenes
where he had dwelt so long, arose within her; and then again she felt a
desire to visit Longfield, and to view the spot in which his mortal
remains were laid. As her imagination pictured the grave of the husband
of her youth, whom she had abandoned and forgotten, tears streamed from
her eyes--the first she had shed, even in idea, beside it. "It is not to
atone--for surely I was not guilty towards him"--such were Lady Lodore's
reflections,--"yet, methinks, in this crisis of my fate, when about to
imitate his abrupt and miserable act of self-banishment, my heart yearns
for some communication with him; and it seems to me as if, approaching
his cold, silent dust, he would hear me if I said, 'Be at peace! your
child is happy through my means!"'

Again her reveries were attended by a gush of tears. "How strange a fate
is mine, ever to be abandoned by, or to abandon, those towards whom I am
naturally drawn into near contact. Fifteen years are flown since I
parted from Lodore for ever! Then by inspiring one so high-minded, so richly
gifted, as Saville, with love for me, fortune appeared ready to
compensate for my previous sufferings; but the curse again operated, and
I shall never see him more. Yet do I not forget thee, Saville, nor thy
love!--nor can it be a crime to think of the past, which is as
irretrievable as if the grave had closed over it. Through Saville it has
been that I have not lived quite in vain--that I have known what love
is; and might have even tasted of happiness, but for the poison which
perpetually mingles with my cup. I never wish to see him more; but if I
earnestly desire to visit Lodore's grave, how gladly would I make a far
longer pilgrimage to see Saville's child, and to devote myself to one
who owes its existence to him. Wretched Cornelia! what thoughts are
these? Is it now, that you are a beggar and an outcast, that you first
encourage unattainable desires?"

Still as she looked round, and remembered how often Saville had been
beside her in that room, thoughts and regrets thronged faster and more
thickly on her. She recollected the haughty self-will and capricious
coquetry which had caused the destruction of her dearest hopes. She took
down a miniature of herself, which her lover had so fruitlessly besought
her to give him. It was on the belief that she had bestowed this picture
on a rival that he had so suddenly come to the determination of quitting
England. It seemed now in its smiles and youth to reproach her for
having wasted both; and the sight of it agitated her bosom, and produced
a tumult of regret and despair at his loss--till she threw it from her,
as too dearly associated with one she must forget. And yet wherefore
forget?--he had forgotten; but as a dead wife might in her grave, love
her husband, though wedded to another, so might the lost, buried
Cornelia remember him, though the husband of Clorinda. Self-compassion
now moved her to tears, and she wept plentiful showers, which rather
exhausted than relieved her.

With a strong effort she recalled her sense of what was actually going
on, and struggling resolutely to calm herself, she sat down and began a
letter to her daughter, which was necessary, as some sort of
explanation, at once to allay wonder and baffle curiosity. Thus she
wrote:


"DEAREST ETHEL,

"My hopes have not been deceived. Mr. Gayland has at last contrived
means for the liberation of your husband; and to-morrow morning you will
leave that shocking place. Perhaps I receive more pleasure from this
piece of good fortune than you, for your sense of duty and sweet
disposition so gild the vilest objects, that you live in a world of your
own, as beautiful as yourself, and the accident of situation is
immaterial to you.

"It is not enough, however, that you should be free. I hope that the
punctilious delicacy of Mr. Villiers will not cause you to reject the
benefits of a mother. In this instance there is more of justice than
generosity in my offer; and it may therefore be accepted without the
smallest hesitation. My jointure ought to satisfy me, and the additional
six hundred a year--which I may call the price of blood, since I bought
it at the sacrifice of the dearest ties and duties,--is most freely at
your service. It will delight me to get rid of it, as much as if thus I
threw off the consciousness of a crime. It is yours by every law of
equity, and will be hereafter paid into your banker's hands. Do not
thank me, my dear child--be happy, that will be my best reward. Be
happy, be prudent--this sum will not make you rich; and the only
acknowledgment I ask of you is, that you make it suffice, and avoid debt
and embarrassment.

"By singular coincidence I am imperatively obliged to leave England at
this moment. The horses are ordered to be here in half an hour--I am
obliged therefore to forego the pleasure of seeing you until my return.
Will you forgive me this apparent neglect, which is the result of
necessity, and favour me by coming to my house to-morrow, on leaving
your present abode, and making it your home until my return? Miss Derham
has promised to call here this afternoon; I shall see her before I go,
and through her you will learn how much you will make me your debtor by
accepting my offers, and permitting me to be of some slight use to you.

"Excuse the brevity and insufficiency of this letter, written at the
moment of departure.--You will hear from me again, when I am able to
send you my address, and I shall hope to have a letter from you.
Meanwhile Heaven bless you, my angelic Ethel! Love your mother, and
never, in spite of every thing, permit unkind thoughts of her to harbour
in your mind. Make Mr. Villiers think as well of me as he can, and
believe me that your welfare will always be the dearest wish of my
heart. Adieu.

"Ever affectionately yours.

"C. LODORE."


She folded and sealed this letter, and at the same moment there was a
knock at the door of her house, which she knew announced the arrival of
Fanny Derham. She was still much agitated, and trying to calm herself,
she took up a newspaper, and cast her eyes down the columns; so, by one
of the most common place of the actions of our life, to surmount the
painful intensity of her thoughts. She read mechanically one or two
paragraphs--she saw the announcements of births, marriages, and deaths.
"My moral death will not be recorded here," she thought, "and yet, I
shall be more dead than any of these." The thought in her mind remained
as it were truncated; her eye was arrested--a paleness came over
her--the pulses of her heart paused, and then beat tumultuously--how
strange--how fatal were the words she read!--

"Died suddenly at the inn at the Mola di Gaeta, on her way from Naples,
Clorinda, the wife of the honourable Horatio Saville, in the
twenty-second year of her age."

Her drawing-room door was opened, the butler announced Miss Derham,
while her eyes still were fixed on the paragraph: her head swam
round--the world seemed to slide from under her. Fanny's calm clear
voice recalled her. She conquered her agitation--she spoke as if she had
not just crossed a gulf--not been transported to a new world; and,
again, swifter than light, brought back to the old one. She conversed
with Fanny for some time; giving some kind of explanation for not having
been to see Ethel, begging her young friend to press her invitation, and
speaking as if in autumn they should all meet again. Fanny, philosophic as
she was, regarded Lady Lodore with a kind of idolatry. The same charm that
had fascinated the unworldly and abstracted Saville, she exercised over
the thoughtful and ingenuous mind of the fair young student. It was the
attraction of engaging manners, added now to the sense of right, joined
to the timid softness of a woman, who trembled on acting unsupported,
even though her conscience approved her deeds. It was her loveliness
which had gained in expression what it had lost in youth, and kindness
of heart was the soul of the enchantment. Fanny ventured to remonstrate
against her sudden departure. "O we shall soon meet again," said
Cornelia; but her thoughts were more of heaven than earth, as the scene
of meeting; for her heart was chilled--her head throbbed--the words she
had read operated a revolution in her frame, more allied to sickness and
death, than hope or triumph.

Fanny at length took her leave, and Lady Lodore was again alone. She took
up the newspaper--hastily she read again the tidings; she sunk on the sofa,
burying her face in the pillow, trying not to think, while she was
indeed the prey to the wildest thoughts.

"Yes," thus ran her reflections, "he is free--he is no longer _married_!
Fool, fool! he is still lost to you!--an outcast and a beggar, shall I
solicit his love! which he believes that I rejected when prosperous.
Rather never, never, let me see him again. My beauty is tarnished, my
youth flown; he would only see me to wonder how he had ever loved me.
Better hide beneath the mountains among which I am soon to find a
home--better, far better, die, than see Saville and read no love in his
eyes.

"Yet thus again I cast happiness from me. What then would I do? Unweave
the web--implore Mr. Villiers to endure my presence--reveal my state of
beggary--ask thanks for my generosity, and humbly wait for a kind glance
from Saville, to raise me to wealth as well as to happiness.--Cornelia,
awake!--be not subdued at the last--act not against your disposition, the
pride of your soul--the determinations you have formed--do not learn to
be humble in adversity--you, who were disdainful in happier days--no! if
they need me--if they love me--if Saville still remembers the
worship--the heart's entire sacrifice which once he made to me--will a
few miles--the obscurity of my abode--or the silence and mystery that
surrounds me, check his endeavours that we should once again meet?

"No!" she said, rising, "my destiny is in other and higher hands than my
own. It were vain to endeavour to controul it. Whatever I do, works
against me; now let the thread be spun to the end, while I do nothing; I
can but endure the worst patiently; and how much better to bear in
silence, than to struggle vainly with the irrevocable decree! I submit.
Let Providence work out its own ends, and God dispose of the being he
has made--whether I reap the harvest in this world or in the next, my
part is played, I will strive no more!"

She believed in her own singleness of purpose as she said this, and yet
she was never more deceived. While she boasted of her resignation, she
was yielding not to a high moral power, but to the pride of her soul.
Her resolutions were in accordance with the haughtiness of her
disposition, and she felt satisfied, not because she was making a noble
sacrifice, but because she thus adorned more magnificently the idol she
set up for worship, and believed herself to be more worthy of applause
and love. Yet who could condemn even errors that led to such unbending
and heroic forgetfulness of all the baser propensities of our nature.
Nor was this feeling of triumph long-lived; the wounding and humiliating
realities of life, soon degraded her from her pedestal, and made her
feel, as it were, the disgrace and indignities of abdication.

Her travelling chariot drove up to the door, and, after a few moments'
preparation, she was summoned. Again she looked round the room; her
heart swelled high with impatience and repining, but again she conquered
herself. She took up her miniature--_that_ now she might possess--for she
could remember without sin--she took up the newspaper, which did or did
not contain the fiat of her fate; but this action appeared to militate
against the state of resignation she had resolved to attain, so she
threw it down: she walked down the stairs, and passed out from her house
for the last time--she got into the carriage--the door was closed--the
horses were in motion--all was over.

Her head felt sick and heavy; she leaned back in her carriage half
stupified. When at last London and its suburbs were passed, the sight of
the open country a little revived her--but she soon drooped again.
Nothing presented itself to her thoughts with any clearness, and the
exultation which had supported her vanished totally. She only knew that
she was alone, poor, forgotten; these words hovered on her lips, mingled
with others, by which she endeavoured to charm away her despondency.
Fortitude and resignation for herself--freedom and happiness for Ethel.
"O yes, she is free and happy--it matters not then what I am!" No tears
flowed to soften this thought. The bright green country--the meadows
mingled with unripe corn-fields--the tufted woods--the hedgerows full of
flowers, could not attract her eye; pangs every now and then seized upon
her heart--she had talked of resignation, but she was delivered up to
despair.

At length she sank into a kind of stupor. She was accompanied by one
servant only; she had told him where she intended to remain that night.
It was past eleven before they arrived at Reading; the night was chill,
and she shivered while she felt as if it were impossible to move, even
to draw up the glasses of her chariot. When she arrived at the inn where
she was to pass the night, she felt keenly the discomfort of having no
female attendant. It was new--she felt as if it were disgraceful, to
find herself alone among strangers, to be obliged to give orders
herself, and to prepare alone for her repose.

All night she could not sleep, and she became aware at last that she was
ill. She burnt with fever--her whole frame was tormented by aches, by
alternate hot and shivering fits, and by a feeling of sickness. When
morning dawned, it was worse. She grew impatient--she rose. She had
arranged that her servant should quit her at this place. He had been but
a short time with her, and was easily dismissed under the idea, that she
was to be joined by a man recommended by a friend, who was accustomed to
the continent, whither it was supposed that she was going. She had
dismissed him the night before, he was already gone, when on the morrow
she ordered the horses.--She paid the bills herself--and had to answer
questions about luggage; all these things are customary to the poor, and
to the other sex. But take a high-born woman and place her in immediate
contact with the rough material of the world, and see how like a
sensitive plant she will shrink, close herself up and droop, and feel as
if she had fallen from her native sphere into a spot unknown, ungenial,
and full of storms.

The illness that oppressed Lady Lodore, made these natural feelings even
more acute, till at last they were blunted by the same cause. She now
wondered what it was that ailed her, and became terrified at the
occasional wanderings that interrupted her torpor. Once or twice she
wished to speak to the post-boy, but her voice failed her. At length
they drove up to the inn at Newbury; fresh horses were called for, and
the landlady came up to the door of the carriage, to ask whether the
lady had breakfasted--whether she would take anything. There was
something ghastly in Lady Lodore's appearance, which at once frightened
the good woman, and excited her compassion. She renewed her questions,
which Lady Lodore had not at first heard, adding, "You seem ill, ma'am;
do take something--had you not better alight?"

"O yes, far better," said Cornelia, "for I think I must be very ill."

The change of posture and cessation of motion a little revived her, and
she began to think that she was mistaken, and that it was all nothing,
and that she was well. She was conducted into the parlour of the inn,
and the landlady left her to order refreshment. "How foolish I am," she
thought; "this is mere fancy; there is nothing the matter with me;" and
she rose to ring the bell, and to order horses. When suddenly, without
any previous warning, struck as by a bolt, she fainted, and fell on the
floor, without any power of saving herself. The sound of her fall
quickened the steps of the landlady, who was returning; all the
chamber-maids were summoned, a doctor sent for, and when Lady Lodore opened
her eyes she saw unknown faces about her, a strange place, and voices yet
stranger. She did not speak, but tried to collect her thoughts, and to
unravel the mystery, as it appeared, of her situation. But soon her
thoughts wandered, and fever and weakness made her yield to the
solicitations of those around. The doctor came, and could make out
nothing but that she was in a high fever: he ordered her to be put to
bed. And thus--Saville, and Ethel, and all hopes and fears, having
vanished from her thoughts,--given up to delirium and suffering, poor
Lady Lodore, alone, unknown, and unattended, remained for several weeks
at a country inn--under the hands of a village doctor--to recover, if
God pleased, if not, to sink, unmourned and unheard of, into an untimely
grave.




CHAPTER XIV


But if for me thou dost forsake
Some other maid, and rudely break
Her worshipped image from its base,
To give to me the ruined place--

Then fare thee well--I'd rather make
My bower upon some icy lake,
When thawing suns begin to shine,
Than trust to love so false as thine!

LALLA ROOKH.


On the same day Mr. and Mrs. Villiers left their sad dwelling to take
possession of lady Lodore's house. The generosity and kindness of her
mother, such as it appeared, though she knew but the smallest portion of
it, charmed Ethel. Her heart, which had so long struggled to love her, was
gladdened by the proofs given that she deserved her warmest affection.
The truest delight beamed from her lovely countenance. Even she had felt
the gloom and depression of adversity. The sight of misery or vice in
those around her tarnished the holy fervour with which she would
otherwise have made every sacrifice for Edward's sake. There is
something in this world, which even while it gives an unknown grace to
rough, and hard, and mean circumstances, contaminates the beauty and
harmony of the noble and exalted. Ethel had been aware of this; she
dreaded its sinister influence over Villiers, and in spite of herself
she pined; she had felt with a shudder that in spite of love and
fortitude, a sense, chilling and deponding, was creeping over her,
making her feel the earth alien to her, and calling her away from the
sadness of the scene around to a world bright and pure as herself. Her
very despair thus dressed itself in the garb of religion; and though
these visitations of melancholy only came during the absence of Villiers
and were never indulged in, yet they were too natural a growth of their
wretched abode to be easily or entirely dismissed. Even now that she was
restored to the fairer scenes of life, compassion for the unfortunate
beings she quitted haunted her, and her feelings were too keenly alive
to the miseries which her fellow-creatures suffered, to permit her to be
relieved from all pain by her own exemption. She turned from such
reflections to the image of her dear kind mother with delight. The roof
that sheltered her was hallowed as hers; all the blessings of life which
she enjoyed came to her from the same source as life itself. She
delighted to trace the current of feeling which had occasioned her to
give up so much, and to imagine the sweetness of disposition, the
vivacity of mind, the talents and accomplishments which her physiognomy
expressed, and the taste manifested in her house, and all the things
which she had collected around her, evinced.

In less than a month after their liberation, she gave birth to son. The
mingled danger and rejoicing attendant on this event, imparted fresh
strength to the attachment that united Edward to her; and the little
stranger himself was a new object of tenderness and interest. Thus their
days of mourning were exchanged for a happiness most natural and welcome
to the human heart. At this time also Horatio Saville returned from
Italy with his little girl. She was scarcely more than a year old, but
displayed an intelligence to be equalled only by her extraordinary
beauty. Her golden silken ringlets were even then profuse, her eyes were
as dark and brilliant as her mother's, but her complexion was fair, and
the same sweet smile flitted round her infant mouth, as gave the charm
to her father's face. He idolized her, and tried by his tenderness and
attention to appease, as it were, the manes of the unfortunate Clorinda.

She, poor girl, had been the victim of the violence of passion and
ill-regulated feelings native to her country, excited into unnatural
force by the singularity of her fate. When Saville saw her first in her
convent, she was pining for liberty; she did not think of any joy beyond
escaping the troublesome impertinence of the nuns and the monotonous
tenor of monastic life, of associating with people she loved, and
enjoying the common usages of life, unfettered by the restrictions that
rendered her present existence a burthen. But though she desired no
more, her disgust for the present, her longing for a change, was a
powerful passion. She was adorned by talents, by genius; she was
eloquent and beautiful, and full of enthusiasm and feeling. Saville
pitied her; he lamented her future fate among her unworthy countrymen;
he longed to cherish, to comfort, and to benefit her. His heart, so
easily won to tenderness, gave her readily a brother's regard. Others,
seeing the active benevolence and lively interest that this sentiment
elicited, might have fancied him inspired by a warmer feeling; but he
well knew the difference, he ardently desired her happiness, but did not
seek his own in her.

He visited her frequently, he brought her books, he taught her English.
They were allowed to meet daily in the parlour of the convent, in the
presence of a female attendant; and his admiration of her talents, her
imagination, her ardent comprehensive mind, increased on every
interview. They talked of literature--the poets--the arts; Clorinda sang
to him, and her fine voice, cultivated by the nicest art, was a source
of deep pleasure and pain to her auditor. His sensibility was awakened
by the tones of love and rapture--sensibility, not alas! for her who
sang, but for the false and absent. While listening, his fancy recalled
Lady Lodore's image; the hopes she had inspired, the rapture he had felt in
her presence--the warm vivifying effect her voice and looks had on him
were remembered, and his heart sank within him to think that all this
sweetness was deceptive, fleeting, lost. Once, overcome by these
thoughts, he resolved to return suddenly to England, to make one effort
more to exchange unendurable wretchedness for the most transporting
happiness;--absence from Cornelia, to the joy of pouring out the
overflowing sentiments of his heart at her feet. While indulging in this
idea, a letter from his sister Lucy caused a painful revulsion; she
painted the woman of the world given up to ambition and fashion,
rejoicing in his departure, and waiting only the moment when she might
with decency become the wife of another. Saville was almost maddened--he
did not visit Clorinda for three days. She received him, when at last he
came, without reproach, but with transport; she saw that sadness, even
sickness, dimmed his eye; she soothed him, she hung over him with
fondness, she sung to him her sweetest, softest airs; his heart melted,
a tear stole from his eye. Clorinda saw his emotion; it excited hers;
her Neapolitan vivacity was not restrained by shame nor fear,--she spoke
of her love for him with the vehemence she felt, and youth and beauty
hallowed the frankness and energy of her expressions. Saville was
touched and pleased,--he left her to meditate on this new state of
things--for free from passion himself, he had never suspected the growth
of it in her heart. He reflected on all her admirable qualities, and the
pity it was that they should be cast at the feet of one of her own
unrefined, uneducated countrymen, who would be incapable of appreciating
her talents--even her love--so that at last she would herself become
degraded, and sink into that system of depravity which makes a prey of
all that is lovely or noble in our nature. He could save her--she loved
him, and he could save her; lost as he was to real happiness, it were to
approximate to it, if he consecrated his life to her welfare.

Yet he would not deceive her. The excess of love which she bestowed
demanded a return which he could not give. She must choose whether, such
as he was, he were worth accepting. Actuated by a sense of justice, he
opened his heart to her without disguise: he told her of his ill-fated
attachment to another--of his self-banishment, and misery--he declared
his real and earnest affection for her--his desire to rescue her from
her present fate, and to devote his life to her. Clorinda scarcely heard
what he said,--she felt only that she might become his--that he would
marry her; her rapture was undisguised, and he enjoyed the felicity of
believing that one so lovely and excellent would at once owe every
blessing of life to him, and that the knowledge of this must ensure his
own content. The consent of her parents was easily yielded,--the Pope is
always ready to grant a dispensation to a Catholic wife marrying a
Protestant husband,--the wedding speedily took place--and Saville became
her husband.

Their mutual torments now began. Horatio was a man of high and
unshrinking principle. He never permitted himself to think of Lady Lodore,
and the warmth and tenderness of his heart led him to attach himself truly
and affectionately to his wife. But this did not suffice for the
Neapolitan. Her marriage withdrew the veil of life--she imagined that
she distinguished the real from the fictitious, but her new sense of
discernment was the source of torture. She desired to be loved as she
loved; she insisted that her rival should be hated--she was shaken by
continual tempests of jealousy, and the violence of her temper,
restrained by no reserve of disposition, displayed itself frightfully.
Saville reasoned, reproached, reprehended, without any avail, except
that when her violence had passed its crisis, she repented, and wept,
and besought forgiveness. Ethel's visit had been a blow hard to bear.
She was the daughter of her whom Saville loved--whom he regretted--on
whom he expended that passion and idolatry, to attain which she would
have endured the most dreadful tortures. These were the reflections, or
rather, these were the ravings, of Clorinda. She had never been so
furious in her jealousy, or so frequent in her fits of passion, as
during the visit of the unconscious and gentle Ethel.

The birth of her child operated a beneficial change for a time; and
except when Saville spoke of England, or she imagined that he was
thinking of it, she ceased to torment him. He was glad; but the moment
was passed when she could command his esteem, or excite his spontaneous
sympathy. He pitied and he loved her; but it was almost as we may become
attached to an unfortunate and lovely maniac; less than ever did he seek
his happiness in her. He loved his infant daughter now better than any
other earthly thing. Clorinda rejoiced in this tie, though she soon grew
jealous even of her own child.

The arrival of Lord Maristow and his daughters was at first full of
benefit to the discordant pair. Clorinda was really desirous of
obtaining their esteem, and she exerted herself to please: when they
talked of her return to England with them, it only excited her to try to
render Italy so agreeable as to induce them to remain there. They were
not like Ethel. They were good girls, but fashionable and fond of
pleasure. Clorinda devised a thousand amusements--concerts, tableaux,
the masquerades of the carnival, were all put in requisition. They
carried their zeal for amusement so far as to take up their abode for a
day or two at Pompeii, feigning to be its ancient inhabitants, and,
bringing the _corps operatique_ to their aid, got up Rossini's opera of
the Ultimi Giorni di Pompeii among the ruins, ending their masquerade by
a mimic eruption. These gaieties did not accord with the classic and
refined tastes of Saville; but he was glad to find his wife and sisters
agree so well, and under the blue sky, and in the laughing land of
Naples, it was impossible not to find beauty and enjoyment even in
extravagance and folly.

Still, like a funeral bell heard amidst a feast, the name of England,
and the necessity of her going thither, struck on the ear and chilled
the heart of the Neapolitan. She resolved never to go; but how could she
refuse to accompany her husband's sisters? how resist the admonitions
and commands of his father? She did not refuse therefore--she seemed to
consent--while she said to Saville, "Poison, stab me--cast me down the
crater of the mountain--exhaust your malice and hatred on me as you
please here--but you shall never take me to England but as a corpse."

Saville replied, "As you will." He was tired of the struggle, and left
the management of his departure to others.

One day his sisters described the delights of a London season, and
strove to win Clorinda by the mention of its balls, parties, and opera;
they spoke of Almack's, and the leaders of fashion; they mentioned Lady
Lodore. They were unaware that Clorinda knew any thing of their brother's
attachment, and speaking of her as one of the most distinguished of
their associates in the London world, made their sister-in-law aware,
that when she made a part of it, she would come into perpetual contact
with her rival. This allusion caused one of her most violent paroxysms
of rage as soon as she found herself alone with her husband. So frantic
did she seem, that Horatio spoke seriously to his father, and declared
he knew of no argument nor power which could induce Clorinda to
accompany them to England. "Then you must go without her," said Lord
Maristow; "your career, your family, your country, must not be
sacrificed to her unreasonable folly." And then, wholly unaware of the
character of the person with whom he had to deal, he repeated the same
thing to Clorinda. "You must choose," he said, "between Naples and your
husband--he must go; do you prefer being left behind?"

Clorinda grew pale, even livid. She returned home. Horatio was not
there; she raved through her house like a maniac; her servants even hid
her child from her, and she rushed from room to room tearing her hair,
and calling for Saville. At length he entered; her eyes were starting
from her head, her frame working with convulsive violence; she strove to
speak--to give utterance to the vehemence pent up within her. She darted
towards him; when suddenly, as if shot to the heart, she fell on the
marble pavement of her chamber, and a red stream poured from her
lips--she had burst a blood-vessel.

For many days she was not allowed to speak nor move. Saville nursed her
unremittingly--he watched by her at night--he tried to soothe her--he
brought her child to her side--his sweetness, and gentleness, and real
tenderness were all expended on her. Although violent, she was not
ungenerous. She was touched by his attentions, and the undisguised
solicitude of his manner. She resolved to conquer herself, and in a fit
of heroism formed the determination to yield, and to go to England. Her
first words, when permitted to speak, were to signify her assent.
Saville kissed and thanked her. She had half imagined that he would
imitate her generosity, and give up the journey. No such thought crossed
his mind; her distaste was too unreasonable to elicit the smallest
sympathy, and consequently any concession. He thanked her warmly, it is
true; and looked delighted at this change, but without giving her time
to retract, he hurried to communicate to his relations the agreeable
tidings.

As she grew better she did not recede, but she felt miserable. The good
spirits and ready preparations of Horatio were all acts of treason
against her: sometimes she felt angry--but she checked herself. Like all
Italians, Clorinda feared death excessively; besides that, to die was to
yield the entire victory to her rival. She struggled therefore, and
conquered herself; and neither expressed her angry jealousy nor her
terrors. She had many causes of fear; she was again in a situation to
increase her family within a few months; and while her safety depended
on her being able to attain a state of calm, she feared a confinement in
England, and believed that it was impossible that she should survive.

She was worn to a skeleton--her large eyes were sunk and ringed with
black, while they burnt with unnatural brilliancy, for her vivacity did
not desert her, and that deceived those around; they fancied that she
was convalescent, and would soon recover strength and good looks, while
she nourished a deep sense of wrong for the slight attention paid to her
sufferings. She wept over herself and her friendless state. Her husband
was not her friend, for he was not her countryman: and full as Saville
was of generous sympathy and kindliness for all, the idea of returning
to England, to his home and friends, to the stirring scenes of life, and
the society of those who loved literature, and were endowed with the
spirit of liberal inquiry and manly habits of thinking, so absorbed and
delighted him, that he could only thank Clorinda again and again--caress
her, and entreat her to get well, that she might share his pleasures.
His words chilled her, and she shrunk from his caresses. "He is thinking
of her, and of seeing her again," she thought. She did him the most
flagrant injustice. Saville was a man of high and firm principle, and
had he been aware of any latent weakness, of any emotion allied to the
master-passion of his soul, he would have conquered it, or have fled
from the temptation. He never thought less of Lady Lodore than now. The
unwonted gentleness and concessions of his wife--his love for his child,
and the presence of his father and dear sisters, dissipated his
regrets,--his conscience was wholly at ease, and he was happy.

Clorinda dared not complain to her English relatives, but she listened
to the lamentations of her Neapolitan friends with a luxury of woe. They
mourned over her as if she were going to visit another sphere; they
pointed out the little island on a map, and seated far off as it was
amidst the northern sea, night and storms, they averred, perpetually
brooded over it, while from the shape of the earth they absolutely
proved that it was impossible to get there. It is true that Lord
Maristow and his daughters, and Saville himself, had come thence--that
was nothing--it was easy to come away. "You see," they said, "the earth
slopes down, and the sun is before them; but when they have to go back,
ah! it is quite another affair; the Alps rise, and the sea boils over,
and they have to toil up the wall of the world itself into winter and
darkness. It is tempting God to go there. O stay, Clorinda, stay in
sunny Italy. Orazio will return: do not go to die in that miserable
birth-place of night and frost."

Clorinda wept yet more bitterly over her hard fate, and the
impossibility of yielding to their wishes. "Would to God," she thought,
"I could abandon the ingrate, and let him go far from Italy and
Clorinda, to die in his wretched country! Would I could forget, hate,
desert him! Ah, why do I idolize one born in that chilly land, where
love and passion are unknown or despised!"

At length the day arrived when they left Naples. It was the month of
May, and very warm. No imagination could paint the glorious beauty of
this country of enchantment, on the completion of spring, before the
heats of summer had withered its freshness. The sparkling waves of the
blue Mediterranean encircled the land, and contrasted with its hues: the
rich foliage of the trees--the festooning of the luxuriant vines, and
the abundant vegetation which sprung fresh from the soil, decorating the
rocks, and mantling the earth with flowers and verdure, were all in the
very prime and blossoming of beauty. The sisters of Saville expressed
their admiration in warm and enthusiastic terms; the words trembled on
poor Clorinda's lips; she was about to say, "Why then desert this land
of bliss?" but Horatio spoke instead: "It is splendid, I own, and once I
felt all that you express. Now a path along a grassy field--a
hedge-row--a copse with a rill murmuring through it--a white cottage
with simple palings enclosing a flower-garden--the spire of a country
church rising from among a tuft of elms--the skies all shadowy with soft
clouds--and the homesteads of a happy thriving peasantry--these are the
things I sigh for. A true English home-scene seems to me a thousand
times more beautiful, as it must be a thousand times dearer than the
garish showy splendour of Naples."

Clorinda's thoughts crept back into her chilled heart; large tear-drops
rose in her eyes, but she concealed them, and shrinking into a corner of
the carriage, she felt more lonely and deserted than she would have done
among strangers who had loved Italy, and participated in her feelings.

They arrived at the inn called the Villa di Cicerone, at the Mola di
Gaeta. All the beauty of the most beautiful part of the Peninsula seems
concentered in that enchanting spot--the perfume of orange flowers
filled the air--the sea was at their feet--the vine-clad hills around.
All this excess of loveliness only added to the unutterable misery of
the Neapolitan girl. Her companions talked and laughed, while she felt
her frame convulsed by internal combats, and the unwonted command she
exercised over her habitual vehemence. Horatio conversed gaily with his
sisters, till catching a glimpse of the pale face of his wretched wife,
her mournful eyes and wasted cheeks, he drew near her. "You are
fatigued, dearest Clorinda," he said, "will you not go to rest?"

He said this in a tender caressing tone, but she felt, "He wants to send
me away--to get rid even of the sight of me." But he sat down by her,
and perceiving her dejection, and guessing partly at its cause, he
soothed her, and talked of their return to her native land, and cheered
her by expressions of gratitude for the sacrifice she was making. Her
heart began to soften, and her tears to flow more freely, when a man
entered, such as haunt the inns in Italy, and watch for the arrival of
rich strangers to make profit in various ways out of them. This man had
a small picture for sale, which he declared to be an original Carlo
Dolce. It was the head of a seraph painted on copper--it was probably a
copy, but it was beautifully executed; besides the depth of colour and
grace of design, there was something singularly beautiful in the
expression of the countenance portrayed,--it symbolized happiness and
love; a beaming softness animated the whole face; a perfect joy, an
ineffable radiance shone out of it. Clorinda took it in her hand--the
representation of heart-felt gladness increased her self-pity; she was
turning towards her husband with a reproachful look, thinking, "Such
smiles you have banished from my face for ever,"--when Sophia Saville,
who was looking over her shoulder, exclaimed, "What an extraordinary
resemblance! there was never any thing so like."

"Who? what?" asked her sister.

"It is Lady Lodore herself," replied Sophia; "her eyes, her mouth, her very
smile."

Lucy gave a quick glance towards her brother. Horatio involuntarily
stepped forward to look, and then as hastily drew back. Clorinda saw it
all--she put down the picture, and left the room--she could not
stay--she could not speak--she knew not what she felt, but that a fiery
torture was eating into her, and she must fly, she knew not whither.
Saville was pained; he hesitated what to do or say--so he remained;
supper was brought in, and Clorinda not appearing, it was supposed that
she had retired to rest. In about an hour and a half after, Horatio went
into her room, and to his horror beheld her stretched upon the cold
bricks of the chamber, senseless; the moon-beams rested on her pale
face, which bore the hues of death. In a moment the house was alarmed,
the village doctor summoned, a courier dispatched to Naples for an
English physician, and every possible aid afforded the wretched
sufferer. She was placed on the bed,--she still lived; her faint pulse
could not be felt, and no blood flowed when a vein was opened, but she
groaned, and now and then opened her eyes with a ghastly stare, and
closed them again as if mechanically. All was horror and despair--no
help--no resource presented itself; they hung round her, they listened
to her groans with terror, and yet they were the only signs of life that
disturbed her death-like state. At last, soon after the dawn of day, she
became convulsed, her pulse fluttered, and blood flowed from her wounded
arm; in about an hour from this time she gave birth to a dead child.
After this she grew calmer and fainter. The physician arrived, but she
was past mortal cure,--she never opened her eyes more, nor spoke, nor
gave any token of consciousness. By degrees her groans ceased, and she
faded into death: the slender manifestations of lingering vitality
gradually decreasing till all was still and cold. After an hour or two
her face resumed its loveliness, pale and wasted as it was: she seemed
to sleep, and none could regret that repose possessed that heart, which
had been alive only to the deadliest throes of unhappy passion. Yet
Saville did more than regret--he mourned her sincerely and deeply,--he
accused himself of hard-heartedness,--he remembered what she was when he
had first seen her;--how full of animation, beauty, and love. He did not
remember that she had perished the victim of uncontrolled passion; he
felt that she was his victim. He would have given worlds to restore her
to life and enjoyment. What was a residence in England--the promises of
ambition--the pleasures of his native land--all that he could feel or
know, compared to the existence of one so young, so blessed with
Heaven's choicest gifts of mind and person. She was his victim, and he
could never forgive himself.

For his father's and sisters' sake he subdued the expression of his
grief, for they also loved Clorinda, and were struck with sorrow at the
sudden catastrophe. His strong mind, also, before long, mastered the
false view he had taken of the cause of her death. He lamented her
deeply, but he did not give way to unavailing remorse, which was founded
on his sensibility, and not on any just cause for repentance. He turned
all his thoughts to repairing her errors, rather than his own, by
cherishing her child with redoubled fondness. The little girl was too
young to feel her loss; she had always loved her father, and now she
clung to his bosom and pressed her infant lips to his cheek, and by her
playfulness and caresses repaid him for the tenderness that he lavished
on her.

After some weeks spent in the north of Italy he returned to England with
her. Lord Maristow and his daughters were already there, and had gone to
Maristow Castle. Saville took up his abode with his cousin Villiers. His
situation was new and strange. He found himself in the very abode of the
dreaded Cornelia, yet she was away, unheard of, almost, it seemed,
forgotten. Did he think of her as he saw the traces of by-gone scenes
around? He played with his child--he secluded himself among his
books--he talked with Ethel of what had happened since their parting,
and reproached Villiers bitterly for not having applied to him in his
distress. But a kind of spell sealed the lips of each, and Lady Lodore, who
was the living spirit of the scene around--the creator of its peace and
happiness--seemed to have passed away from the memory of all. It was in
appearance only. Not an hour, not a minute of the day passed, that did
not bring her idea to their minds, and Saville and Ethel each longed for
the word to be uttered by either, which would permit them to give
expression to the thoughts that so entirely possessed them.




CHAPTER XV


The music
Of man's fair composition best accords,
When 'tis in consort, not in single strains:
My heart has been untuned these many months,
Wanting her presence, in whose equal love
True harmony consisted.

FORD.


At the beginning of September the whole party assembled at Maristow
Castle. Even Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry was among the guests. She had not
visited Ethel in London, because she would not enter Lady Lodore's house,
but she had the true spinster's desire of seeing the baby, and thus
overcame her reluctance to quitting Longfield for a few weeks. Fanny Derham
also accompanied them, unable to deny Ethel's affectionate entreaties.
Fanny's situation had been beneficially changed. Sir Gilbert Derham,
finding that his granddaughter associated with people _in the world_, and
being applied to by Lord Maristow, was induced to withdraw Mrs. Derham
from her mean situation, and to settle a small fortune on each of her
children. Fanny was too young, and too wedded to her platonic notions of
the supremacy of mind, to be fully aware of the invaluable advantages of
pecuniary independence for a woman. She fancied that she could enter on
the career--the only career permitted her sex--of servitude, and yet
possess her soul in freedom and power. She had never, indeed, thought
much of these things: life was, as it concerned herself, a system of
words only. As always happens to the young, she only knew suffering
through her affections, and the real chain of life--its necessities and
cares--and the sinister influences exercised by the bad passions of our
fellow-creatures--had not yet begun to fetter her aspiring thoughts.
Beautiful in her freedom, in her enthusiasm, and even in her learning,
but, above all, in the lively kindliness of her heart, she excited the
wonder and commanded the affections of all. Saville had never seen any
one like her--she brought to his recollection his own young feelings
before experience had lifted "the painted veil which those who live call
life," or passion and sorrow had tamed the ardour of his mind; he looked
on her with admiration, and yet with compassion, wondering where and how
the evil spirit of the world would show its power to torment, and
conquer the free soul of the disciple of wisdom.

Yet Saville's own mind was rather rebuked than tamed: he knew what
suffering was, yet he knew also how to endure it, and to turn it to
advantage, deriving thence lessons of fortitude, of forbearance, and
even of hope. It was not, however, till the seal on his lips was taken
off, and the name of Cornelia mentioned, that he became aware that the
same heart warmed his bosom, as had been the cause at once of such
rapture and misery in former times. Yet even now he did not acknowledge
to himself that he still loved, passionately, devotedly loved, Lady Lodore.
The image of the pale Clorinda stretched on the pavement--his
victim--still dwelt in his memory, and he made a sacrifice at her tomb
of every living feeling of his own. He fancied, therefore, that he spoke
coldly of Cornelia, with speculation only, while in fact, at the very
mention of her name a revulsion took place in his being--his eyes
brightened, his face beamed with animation, his very figure enlarged,
his heart was on fire within him. Villiers saw and appreciated these
tokens of passion; but Ethel only perceived an interest in her mother,
shared with herself, and was half angry that he made no professions of
the constancy of his attachment.

Still, day after day, and soon, all day long, they talked of Lady Lodore.
None but a lover and a daughter could have adhered so pertinaciously to one
subject; and thus Saville and Ethel were often left to themselves, or
joined only by Fanny. Fanny was very mysterious and alarming in what she
said of her beautiful and interesting favourite. While Ethel lamented
her mother's love of the continent, conjectured concerning her return,
and dwelt on the pleasures of their future intercourse, Fanny shook her
head, and said, "It was strange, very strange, that not one letter had
yet reached them from her." She was asked to explain, but she could only
say, that when she last saw Lady Lodore, she was impressed by the idea
that all was not as it seemed. She tried to appear as if acting
according to the ordinary routine of life, and yet was evidently
agitated by violent and irrepressible feeling. Her manner, she had
herself fancied, to be calm, and yet it betrayed a wandering of thought,
a fear of being scrutinized, manifested in her repetition of the same
phrases, and in the earnestness with which she made assurances
concerning matters of the most trivial import. This was all that Fanny
could say, but she was intimately persuaded of the correctness of her
observation, and lamented that she had not inquired further and
discovered more. "For," she said, "the mystery, whatever it is, springs
from the most honourable motives. There was nothing personal nor
frivolous in the feelings that mastered her;" and Fanny feared that at
that very moment she was sacrificing herself to some project--some
determination, which, while it benefited others, was injuring herself.
Ethel, with all her affection for her mother, was not persuaded of the
justice of these suspicions, nor could be brought to acknowledge that
the mystery of Lady Lodore's absence was induced by any motives as
strange and forcible as those suggested by Fanny; but believed that her
young friend was carried away by her own imagination and high-flown
ideas. Saville was operated differently upon. He became uneasy,
thoughtful, restless: a thousand times he was on the point of setting
out to find a clue to the mystery, and to discover the abode of the
runaway,--but he was restrained. It is usually supposed that women are
always under the influence of one sentiment, and if Lady Lodore acted
under the direction and for the sake of another, wherefore should
Saville interfere? what right had he to investigate her secrets, and
disturb her arrangements?

Several months passed. Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry returned to Longfield,
and still the mystery concerning Ethel's mother continued, and the
wonder increased, Soon after Christmas Mr. Gayland, who was also Lord
Maristow's solicitor, came down to the Castle for a few days. He made
inquiries concerning Lady Lodore, and was somewhat surprised at her strange
disappearance and protracted absence. He asked several questions, and
seemed to form conclusions in his own mind; he excited the curiosity of
all, yet restrained himself from satisfying it; he was evidently
disquieted by her unbroken silence, yet feared to betray the origin of
his uneasiness.

While he remained curiosity was dominant: when he went he requested
Villiers to be good enough to let him know if any thing should be heard
of Lady Lodore. He asked this more than once, and required an absolute
promise. After his departure, his questions, his manner, and his last
words recurred, exciting even more surprise than when he had been
present. Fanny brought forward all he said to support her own
conjectures; a shadow of disquiet crossed Ethel's mind; she asked
Villiers to take some steps to discover where her mother was, and on his
refusal argued earnestly, though vainly, to persuade him to comply.
Villiers was actuated by the common-place maxim of not interfering with
the actions and projects of others. "Lady Lodore is not a child," he
said, "she knows what she is about--has she not always avoided you,
Ethel? Why press yourself inopportunely upon her?"

But Ethel was not now to be convinced by the repetition of these
arguments. She urged her mother's kindness and sacrifice; her having
given up her home to them; her house still unclaimed by her, still at
their disposal, and which contained so many things which must have been
endeared by long use and habit, and the relinquishing of which showed
something extraordinary in her motives. This was a woman's feeling, and
made little impression on Villiers--he was willing to praise and to
thank Lady Lodore for her generosity and kindness, but he suspected nothing
beyond her acknowledged acts.

Saville heard this disquisition; he wished Villiers to be convinced--he
was persuaded that Ethel was right--he was angry at his cousin's
obstinacy--he was miserable at the idea that Cornelia should feel
herself treated with neglect--that she should need protection and not
have it--that she should be alone, and not find assistance proffered,
urged upon her. He mounted his horse and took a solitary ride,
meditating on these things--his imagination became heated, his soul on
fire. He pictured Lady Lodore in solitude and desertion, and his heart
boiled within him. Was she sick, and none near her?--was she dead, and her
grave unvisited and unknown? A lover's fancy is as creative as a poet's
and when once it takes hold of any idea, it clings to it tenaciously. If
it is thus even with ordinary minds, how much more with Saville, with
all energy which was his characteristic, and the latent fire of love
burning in his heart. His resolution was sudden, and acted on at once.
He turned his horse's head towards London. On reaching the nearest town,
he ordered a chaise and four post horses. He wrote a few hurried lines
announcing an absence of two or three days, and with the rapidity that
always attended the conception of his purposes and their execution, the
next morning, having travelled all night, he was in Mr. Gayland's
office, questioning that gentleman concerning Lady Lodore, and seeking
from him all the light he could throw upon her long-continued and
mysterious absence.

Mr. Gayland had promised Lady Lodore not to reveal her secret to Mr. or
Mrs. Villiers; but he felt himself free to communicate it to any other
person. He was very glad to get rid of the burden and even the
responsibility of being her sole confidant. He related all he knew to
Saville, and the truth flashed on the lover's mind. His imagination
could not dupe him--he could conceive, and therefore believe in her
generosity, her magnanimity. He had before, in some degree, divined the
greatness of mind of which Lady Lodore was capable; though as far as
regarded himself, her pride, and his modesty, had deceived him. Now he
became at once aware that Cornelia had beggared herself for Ethel's
sake. She had disposed of her jointure, given up the residue of her
income, and wandered away, poor and alone, to avoid the discovery of the
extent and consequences of her sacrifices. Saville left Mr. Gayland's
office with a bursting and a burning heart. At once he paid a warm
tribute of admiration to her virtues, and acknowledged to himself his
own passionate love. It became a duty, in his eyes, to respect, revere,
adore one so generous and noble. He was proud of the selection his heart
had made, and of his constancy. "My own Cornelia," such was his reverie,
"how express your merit and the admiration it deserves!--other people
talk of generosity, and friendship, and parental affection--but you
manifest a visible image of these things; and while others theorize, you
embody in your actions all that can be imagined of glorious and
angelic." He congratulated himself on being able to return to the
genuine sentiments of his heart, and in finding reality give sanction to
the idolatry of his soul.

He longed to pour out his feelings at her feet, and to plead the cause
of his fidelity and affection, to read in her eyes whether she would see
a reward for her sufferings in his attachment. Where was she, to receive
his protestations and vows? He half forgot, in the fervour of his
feelings, that he knew not whither she had retreated, nor possessed any
clue whereby to find her. He returned to Mr. Gayland to inquire from
him; but he could tell nothing; he went to her house and questioned the
servants, they remembered nothings; at last he found her maid, and
learnt from her, where she was accustomed to hire her post-horses; this
was all the information at which he could arrive.

Going to Newman's, with some difficulty he found the post-boy, who
remembered driving her. By his means he traced her to Reading, but here
all clue was lost. The inn to which she had gone had passed into other
hands, and no one knew any thing about the arrivals and departures of
the preceding summer. He made various perquisitions, and lighted by
chance on the servant she had taken with her to Reading, and there
dismissed. From what he said, and a variety of other circumstances, he
became convinced that she had gone abroad. He searched the foreign
passport-office, and found that one had been taken out at the French
Ambassador's in the month of April, by a Mrs. Fitzhenry. He persuaded
himself that this was proof that she had gone to Paris. It was most
probable that, impoverished as she was, and desirous of concealing her
altered situation, that she should, as Lodore had formerly done, dismiss a
title which would at once encumber and betray her. He immediately
resolved to cross to France. And yet for a moment he hesitated, and
reflected on what it was best to do.

He had given no intimation of his proceedings to his cousin, and they
were unaware that his journey was connected with Lady Lodore. He had a
lover's wish to find her himself--himself to be the only source of
consolation--the only mediator to restore her to her daughter and to
happiness. But his fruitless attempts at discovery made him see that his
wishes were not to be effected easily. He felt that he ought to
communicate all he knew to his cousins, and even to ensure their
assistance in his researches. Before going abroad, therefore, he
returned to Maristow Castle.

He arrived late in the evening. Lord Maristow and his daughters were
gone out to dinner. The three persons whom Saville especially wished to
see, alone occupied the drawing-room. Edward was writing to his father,
who had advised him, now that he had a son, entirely to cut off the
entail and mortgage a great part of the property: it was a distasteful
task to answer the suggestions of unprincipled selfishness. While he was
thus occupied, Ethel had taken from her desk her mother's last letter,
and was reading it again and again, weighing every syllable, and
endeavouring to discover a hidden meaning. She went over to the sofa on
which Fanny was sitting, to communicate to her a new idea that had
struck her. The studious girl had got into a corner with her Cicero, and
was reading the Tusculan Questions, which she readily laid aside to
enter on a subject so deeply interesting. Saville opened the door, and
appeared most unexpectedly among them. His manner was eager and abrupt,
and the first words he uttered were, "I am come to disturb you all, and
to beg of you to return to London:--no time must be lost--can you go
to-morrow?"

"Certainly," said Villiers, "if you wish it."

"But why?" asked Ethel.

"You have found Lady Lodore!" exclaimed Fanny.

"You are dreaming, Fanny," said Ethel; "you see Horace shakes his head.
But if we go to-morrow, yet rest to-night. You are fatigued, pale, and
ill, Horace--you have been exerting yourself too much--explain your
wishes, but take repose and refreshment."

Saville was in too excited a state to think of either. He repelled
Ethel's feminine offers, till he had related his story. His listeners
heard him with amazement. Villiers's cheeks glowed with shame, partly at
the injustice of his former conduct--partly at being the object of so
much sacrifice and beneficence on the part of his mother-in-law. Fanny's
colour also heightened; she clasped her hands in delight, mingling
various exclamations with Saville's story. "Did I not say so? I was sure
of it. If you had seen her when I did, on the day of her going away, you
would have been as certain as I." Ethel wept in silence, her heart was
touched to the core, "the remorse of love" awakened in it. How cold and
ungrateful had been all her actions: engrossed by her love for her
husband, she had bestowed no sympathy, made no demonstrations towards
her mother. The false shame and Edward's oft-repeated arguments which
had kept her back, vanished from her mind. She reproached herself
bitterly for lukewarmness and neglect; she yearned to show her
repentance--to seek forgiveness--to express, however feebly, her sense
of her mother's angelic goodness. Her tears flowed to think of these
things, and that her mother was away, poor and alone, believing herself
wronged in all their thoughts, resenting perhaps their unkindness,
mourning over the ingratitude of her child.

When the first burst of feeling was over, they discussed their future
proceedings. Saville communicated his discoveries and his plan of
crossing to France. Villiers was as eager as his cousin to exert himself
actively in the pursuit. His ingenuous and feeling mind was struck by
his injustice, and he was earnest in his wish to atone for the past, and
to recompense her, if possible, for her sacrifices. As every one is apt
to do with regard to the ideas of others, he was not satisfied with his
cousin's efforts or conclusions; he thought more questions might be
asked--more learnt at the inns on the route which Lady Lodore had taken.
The passport Saville had imagined to be hers, was taken out for Dover.
Reading was far removed from any road to Kent. They argued this. Horatio
was not convinced; but while he was bent on proceeding to Paris, Edward
resolved to visit Reading--to examine the neighbourhood--to requestion
the servants--to put on foot a system of inquiry which must in the end
assure them whether she was still in the kingdom. It was at once
resolved, that on the morrow they should go to London.

Thither they accordingly went. They repaired to Lady Lodore's house.
Saville on the next morning departed for France, and a letter soon reached
them from him, saying, that he felt persuaded that the Mrs. Fitzhenry was
Lady Lodore, and that he should pursue his way with all speed to Paris.
It appeared, that the lady in question had crossed to Calais on the
eleventh of June, and intimated her design of going to the Bagneres de
Bigorre among the Pyrennees, passing through Paris on her way. The
mention of the Bagneres de Bigorre clinched Saville's suspicions--it was
such a place as one in Lady Lodore's position might select for her
abode--distant, secluded, situated in sublime and beautiful scenery,
singularly cheap, and seldom visited by strangers; yet the annual resort
of the French from Bordeaux and Lyons, civilized what otherwise had been
too rude and wild for an English lady. It was a long journey
thither--the less wonder that nothing was heard, or seen, or surmised
concerning the absentee by her numerous acquaintances, many of whom were
scattered on the continent. Saville represented all these things, and
expressed his conviction that he should find her. His letter was brief,
for he was hurried, and he felt that it were better to say nothing than
to express imperfectly the conflicting emotions alive in his heart. "My
life seems a dream," he said at the conclusion of his letter; "a long
painful dream, since last I saw her. I awake, she is not here; I go to
seek her--my actions have that single scope--my thoughts tend to that
aim only; I go to find her--to restore her to Ethel. If I succeed in
bestowing this happiness on her, I shall have my reward, and, whatever
happens, no selfish regret shall tarnish my delight."

He urged Villiers, meanwhile, not to rely too entirely on the conviction
so strong in himself, but to pursue his plan of discovery with vigour.
Villiers needed no spur. His eagerness was fully alive; he could not
rest till he had rescued his mother-in-law from solitude and obscurity.
He visited Reading; he extended his inquiries to Newbury: here more
light broke in on his researches. He heard of Lady Lodore's illness--of her
having resided for several months at a villa in the neighbourhood, while
slowly recovering from a fever by which for a long time her life had
been endangered. He heard also of her departure, her return to London.
Then again all was obscurity. The innkeepers and letters of post-horses
in London, were all visited in vain--the mystery became as impenetrable
as ever. It seemed most probable that she was living in some obscure
part of the metropolis--Ethel's heart sunk within her at the thought.

Edward wrote to Saville to communicate this intelligence, which put an
end to the idea of her being in France--but he was already gone on to
Bagneres. He himself perambulated London and its outskirts, but all in
vain. The very thought that she should be residing in a place so sad,
nay, so humiliating, without one gilding circumstance to solace poverty
and obscurity, was unspeakably painful both to Villiers and his wife.
Ethel thought of her own abode in Duke street during her husband's
absence, and how miserable and forlorn it had been--she now wept
bitterly over her mother's fate; even Fanny's philosophy could not
afford consolation for these ideas.

An accident, however, gave a new turn to their conjectures. In the draw
of a work-table, Ethel found an advertisement cut out of a newspaper,
setting forth the merits of a cottage to be let near Rhaiyder Gowy in
Radnorshire, and with this, a letter from the agent at Rhaiyder, dated
the 13th of May, in answer to inquiries concerning the rent and
particulars. The letter intimated, that if the account gave
satisfaction, the writer would get the cottage prepared for the tenant
immediately, and the lady might take possession at the time mentioned,
on the 1st of June. The day after finding this letter, Villiers set out
for Wales.

But first he persuaded Ethel to spend the interval of his absence at
Longfield. She had lately fretted much concerning her mother, and as she
was still nursing her baby, Edward became uneasy at her pale cheeks and
thinness. Ethel was anxious to preserve her health for her child; she
felt that her uneasiness and pining would be lessened by a removal into
the country. She was useless in London, and there was something in her
residence in her mother's house--in the aspect of the streets--in the
memory of what she had suffered there, and the fear that Lady Lodore was
enduring a worse repetition of the same evils, that agitated and preyed
upon her. Her aunt had pressed her very much to come and see her, and
she wrote to say, that she might be expected on the following day. She
bade adieu to Villiers with more of hope with regard to his success than
she had formerly felt. She became half convinced that her mother was not
in London. Fanny supported her in these ideas; they talked continually
of all they knew--of the illness of Lady Lodore--of her firmness of
purpose in not sending for her daughter, or altering her plans in
consequence; they comforted themselves that the air of Wales would
restore her health, and the beauty of the scenery and the freedom of
nature sooth her mind. They were full of hope--of more--of expectation.
Ethel, indeed, had at one time proposed accompanying her husband, but
she yielded to his entreaties, and to the fear suggested, that she might
injure her child's health. Villiers's motions would be more prompt
without her. They separated. Ethel wrote to Saville a letter to find him
at Paris, containing an account of their new discoveries, and then
prepared for her journey to Essex with Fanny, her baby, and the
beautiful little Clorinda Saville, who had been left under her care, on
the following day.




CHAPTER XVI


I am not One who much or oft delights
To season my Friends with personal talk,--
Of Friends who live within an easy walk,
Or Neighbours, daily, weekly in my sight.
And, for my chance acquaintance, Ladies bright.
Sons, Mothers, Maidens withering on the stalk,
These all wear out of me, like Forms, with chalk
Painted on rich men's floors, for one feast-night.

WORDSWORTH.


Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry returned to Longfield from Maristow Castle at
the end of the month of November. She gladly came back, in all the
dinginess and bleakness of that dismal season, to her beloved seclusion
at Longfield. The weather was dreary, a black frost invested every thing
with its icy chains, the landscape looked disconsolate, and now and then
wintry blasts brought on snow-storms, and howled loudly through the long
dark nights. The amiable spinster drew her chair close to the fire; with
half-shut eyes she contemplated the glowing embers, and recalled many past
winters just like this, when Lodore was alive and in America; or, diving
yet deeper into memory, when the honoured chair she now occupied, had
been dignified by her father, and she had tried to sooth his querulous
complaints on the continued absence of her brother Henry. When, instead
of these familiar thoughts, the novel ones of Ethel and Villiers
intruded themselves, she rubbed her eyes to be quite sure that she did
not dream. It was a lamentable change; and who the cause? Even she whose
absence had been, she felt, wickedly lamented at Maristow Castle,
Cornelia Santerre--she, who in an evil hour, had become Lady Lodore, and
who would before God, answer for the disasters and untimely death of her
ill-fated husband.

With any but Mrs. Fitzhenry, such accusations had, after the softening
process of time, been changed to an admission, that, despite her errors,
Lady Lodore had rather been misled and mistaken, than heinously faulty; and
her last act, in sacrificing so much to her daughter, although the extent
of her sacrifice was unknown to her sister-in-law, had cancelled her former
delinquencies. But the prejudiced old lady was not so easily mollified;
she was harsh alone towards her, but all the gall of her nature was
collected and expended on the head of her brother's widow. Probably an
instinctive feeling of her unreasonableness made her more violent. Her
language was bitter whenever she alluded to her--she rejoiced at her
absence, and instead of entering into Ethel's gratitude and impatience,
she fervently prayed that she might never appear on the scene again.

Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry was less of a gossip than any maiden lady who
had ever lived singly in the centre of a little village. Her heart was
full of the dead and the absent--of past events, and their long train of
consequences, so that the history of the inhabitants of her village,
possessed no charm for her. If any one among them suffered from
misfortune she endeavoured to relieve them, and if any died, she lamented,
moralized on the passage of time, and talked of Lodore's death; but
the scandal, the marriages, the feuds, and wonderful things that came to
pass at Longfield, appeared childish and contemptible, the flickering of
earth-born tapers compared to the splendour, the obscuration, and final
setting of the celestial luminary which had been the pole-star of her
life.

It was from this reason that Mrs. Fitzhenry had not heard of the Lady
who lodged at Dame Nixon's cottage, in the Vale of Bewling, till the
time, when, after having exhausted the curiosity of Longfield, she was
almost forgotten. The Lady, she was known by no other name, had arrived
in the town during Mrs. Fitzhenry's visit to Maristow castle. She had
arrived in her own chariot, unattended by any servant; the following day
she had taken up her abode at Dame Nixon's cottage, saying, that she was
only going to stay a week: she had continued there for more than three
months.

Dame Nixon's cottage was situated about a mile and a half from
Longfield. It stood alone in a little hollow embowered by trees; the
ground behind rose to a slight upland, and a rill trickled through the
garden. You got to it by a bye path, which no wheeled vehicle could
traverse, though a horse might, and it was indeed the very dingle and
cottage which Ethel had praised during her visit into Essex in the
preceding year. The silence and seclusion were in summer tranquillizing
and beautiful; in winter sad and drear; the fields were swampy in wet
weather, and in snow and frost it seemed cut off from the rest of the
world. Dame Nixon and her granddaughter lived there alone. The girl had
been engaged to be married. Her lover jilted her, and wedded a richer
bride. The story is so old, that it is to be wondered that women have
not ceased to lament so common an occurrence. Poor Margaret was, on the
contrary, struck to the heart--she despised herself for being unable to
preserve her lover's affections, rather than the deceiver for his
infidelity. She neglected her personal appearance, nor ever showed
herself among her former companions, except to support her grandmother
to church. Her false lover sat in the adjoining pew. She fixed her eyes
on her Prayer-book during the service, and on the ground as she went
away. She did not wish him to see the change which his faithlessness had
wrought, for surely it would afflict him. Once there had not bloomed a
fresher or gayer rose in the fields of Essex--now she had grown thin and
pale--her young light step had become slow and heavy--sickness and
sorrow made her eyes hollow, and her cheeks sunken. She avoided every
one, devoting herself to attendance on her grandmother. Dame Nixon was
nearly doting. Life was ebbing fast from her old frame; her best
pleasure was to sun herself in the garden in summer, or to bask before
the winter's fire. While enjoying these delights, her dimmed eyes
brightened, and a smile wreathed her withered lips; she said, "Ah! this
is comfortable;" while her broken-hearted grandchild envied a state of
being which could content itself with mere animal enjoyment. They were
very poor. Margaret had to work hard; but the thoughts of the head, or,
at least, the feelings of the heart, need not wait on the labour of the
hands. The Sunday visit to church kept alive her pain; her very prayers
were bitter, breathed close to the deceiver and her who had usurped her
happiness: the memory and anticipation haunted her through the week; she
was often blinded by tears as she patiently pursued her household
duties, or her toil in their little garden. Her hands were hardened with
work, her throat, her face sunburnt; but exercise and occupation did not
prevent her from wasting away, or her cheek from becoming sunk and wan.

Dame Nixon's cottage was poor but roomy; some years before, a gentleman
from London had, in a freak, hired two rooms in it, and furnished them.
Since then, she had sometimes let them, and now they were occupied by
the stranger lady. At first all three of the inhabitants appeared each
Sunday at church. The Lady was dressed in spotless and simple white, and
so closely veiled, that no one could see her face; of course she was
beautiful. Soon after Mrs. Elizabeth's return from Maristow Castle, it
was discovered that first the lady stayed away, and soon, that the whole
party absented themselves on Sunday; and as this defalcation demanded
inquiry, it was discovered that a pony chaise took them three miles off
to the church of the nearest village. This was a singular and yet a
beneficial change. The false swain must rejoice at losing sight of the
memento of his sin, and Margaret would certainly pray with a freer
heart, when she no longer shrunk from his gaze and that of his wife.

It was not until the end of January that Mrs. Elizabeth heard of the
Lady; it was not till the beginning of February that she asked a single
question about her.

In January, passing the inn-yard, the curate's wife, who was walking
with her, said, "There is the chariot belonging to the Lady who lodges
at dame Nixon's cottage. I wonder who she is. The arms are painted out."

"Ah, dame Nixon has a lodger then; that is a good thing, it will help
her through the winter. I have not seen her or her daughter at church
lately."

"No," replied the other, "they go now to Bewling church."

"I am glad to hear it," said Mrs. Fitzhenry; "it is much better for poor
Margaret not to come here."

The conversation went on, and the Lady was alluded to, but no questions
were asked or curiosity excited. In February she heard from the doctor's
wife, that the doctor had been to the cottage, and that the Lady was
indisposed. She heard at the same time that this Lady had refused to
receive the visits of the curate's lady and the doctor's lady--excusing
herself, that she was going to leave Essex immediately. This had
happened two months before. On hearing of her illness, Mrs. Elizabeth
thought of calling on her, but this stopped her. "It is very odd," said
the doctor's wife, "she came in her own carriage, and yet has no
servants. She lives in as poor a way as can be, down in that cottage,
yet my husband says she is more like the Queen of England in her looks
and ways than any one he ever saw."

"Like the Queen of England?" said Mrs. Fitzhenry, "What queen?--Queen
Charlotte?" who had been the queen of the greater part of the good
lady's life.

"She is as young and beautiful as an angel," said the other, half angry;
"it is very mysterious. She did not look downcast like, as if any thing
was wrong, but was as cheerful and condescending as could be.
'Condescending, Doctor,' said I, for my husband used the word; 'you
don't want condescension from a poor body lodging at dame Nixon's.'--'A
poor body!' said he, in a huff, 'she is more of a lady, indeed more like
the Queen of England than any rich body you ever saw.' And what is odd,
no one knows her name--Dame Nixon and Margaret always call her Lady--the
very marks are picked out from her pocket handkerchiefs. Yet I did hear
that there was a coronet plain to be seen on one--a thing impossible
unless she was a poor cast-away; and the doctor says he'd lay his life
that she was nothing of that. He must know her name when he makes out
her bill, and I told him to ask it plump, but he puts off, and puts off,
till I am out of all patience."

A misty confused sense of discomfort stole over Mrs. Elizabeth when she
heard of the coronet in the corner of the pocket handkerchief, but it
passed away without suggesting any distinct idea to her mind. Nor did
she feel curiosity about the stranger--she was too much accustomed to
the astonishment, the conjectures, the gossip of Longfield, to suppose
that there was any real foundation for surprise, because its
wonder-loving inhabitants choose to build up a mystery out of every
common occurrence of life.

This absence of inquisitiveness must long have kept Mrs. Fitzhenry in
ignorance of who her neighbour was, and the inhabitants of Longfield
would probably have discovered it before her, had not the truth been
revealed even before she entertained a suspicion that there was any
secret to be found out.

"I beg your pardon, ma'am," said her maid to her one evening, as she was
superintending the couchée of the worthy spinster, "I think you ought
to know, though I am afraid you may be angry."

The woman hesitated; her mistress encouraged her. "If it is any thing I
ought to know, Wilmot, tell it at once, and don't be afraid. What has
happened to you?"

"To me, ma'am,--la! nothing," replied the maid; "it's something about
the Lady at dame Nixon's, only you commanded me never to speak the name
of----"

And again the good woman stopped short. Mrs. Fitzhenry, a little
surprised, and somewhat angry, bade her go on. At length, in plain words
she was told:

"Why, ma'am, the Lady down in the Vale is no other than my lady--than
Lady Lodore."

"Ridiculous--who told you so?"

"My own eyes, ma'am; I shouldn't have believed any thing else. I saw the
Lady, and it was my Lady, as sure as I stand here."

"But how could you know her? it is years since you saw her."

"Yes, ma'am," said the woman, with a smile of superiority; "but it is
not easy to forget Lady Lodore. See her yourself, ma'am,--you will know
then that I am right."

Wilmot had lived twenty years with Mrs. Fitzhenry. She had visited town
with her at the time of Ethel's christening. She had been kept in
vexatious ignorance of subsequent events, till the period of the visit
of her mistress and niece to London two years before, when she
indemnified herself. Through the servants of Villiers, and of the Misses
Saville, she had learnt a vast deal; and not satisfied with mere
hearsay, she had seen Lady Lodore several times getting into her carriage
at her own door, and had even been into her house: such energy is there in
a liberal curiosity. The same disinterested feeling had caused her to go
down to dame Nixon's with an offer from her mistress of service to the
Lady, hearing she was ill. She went perfectly unsuspicious of the
wonderful discovery she was about to make, and was thus rewarded beyond
her most sanguine hopes, by being in possession of a secret, known to
herself alone. The keeping of a secret is, however, a post of no honour
if all knowledge be confined to the possessor alone. Mrs. Wilmot was
tolerably faithful, with all her love of knowledge; she was sure it
would vex her mistress if Lady Lodore's strange place of abode were
known at Longfield, and Mrs. Fitzhenry was consequently the first person
to whom she had hinted the fact. All this account she detailed with
great volubility. Her mistress recommended discretion most earnestly;
and at the same time expressed a doubt whether her information was
correct.

"I wish you would go and judge for yourself, ma'am," said the maid.

"God forbid!" exclaimed Mrs. Fitzhenry. "God grant I never see Lady
Lodore again! She will go soon. You tell me that dame Nixon says she is
only staying till she is well. She will go soon, and it need never be
known, except to ourselves, Wilmot, that she was ever here."

There was a dignity in this eternal mystery that somewhat compensated
for the absence of wonder and fuss which the woman had anticipated with
intense pleasure. She assured her mistress, over and over again, of her
secrecy and discretion, and was dismissed with the exhortation to forget
all she had learnt as quickly as possible.

"Wherefore did she come here? what can she be doing?" Mrs. Fitzhenry
asked herself over and over again. She could not guess. It was strange,
it was mysterious, and some mischief was at the bottom--but she would go
soon--"would that she were already gone!"

It must be mentioned that Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry had left Maristow
Castle before the arrival of Mr. Gayland, and had therefore no knowledge
of the still more mysterious cloud that enveloped Lady Lodore's absence.
Ignorant of her self-destroying sacrifices and generosity, her pity was
not excited, her feelings were all against her. She counted the days as
they passed, and looked wistfully at Wilmot, hoping that she would
quickly bring tidings of the Lady's departure. In vain; the doctor
ceased to visit the cottage, but the Lady remained. All at once the
doctor visited it again with greater assiduity than ever--not on account
of his beautiful patient--but Dame Nixon had had a paralytic stroke, and
the kind Lady had sent for him, and promised to defray all the expenses
of the poor woman's illness.

All this was truly vexatious. Mrs. Fitzhenry fretted, and even asked
Wilmot questions, but the unwelcome visitor was still there. Wherefore?
What could have put so disagreeable a whim into her head? The good lady
could think of no motive, while she considered her presence an insult.
She was still more annoyed when she received a letter from Ethel. It had
been proposed that Mr. and Mrs. Villiers should pay her a visit in the
spring; but now Ethel wrote to say that she might be immediately
expected. "I have strange things to tell you about my dear mother,"
wrote Ethel; "it is very uncertain where she is. Horatio can hear
nothing of her at Paris, and will soon return. Edward is going to Wales,
as there seems a great likelihood that she has secluded herself there.
While he is away you may expect me. I shall not be able to stay long--he
will come at the end of a week to fetch me."

Mrs. Fitzhenry shuddered. Her prejudices were stronger than ever. She
experienced the utmost wretchedness from the idea that the residence of
Lady Lodore would be discovered, and a family union effected. It seemed
desecration to the memory of her brother, ruin to Ethel--the greatest
misfortune that could befal any of them. Her feelings were exaggerated,
but they were on that account the more powerful. How could she avert the
evil?--a remedy must be sought, and she fixed on one--a desperate one,
in truth, which appeared to her the sole mode of saving them all from
the greatest disasters.

She resolved to visit Lady Lodore; to represent to her the impropriety and
wickedness of her having any intercourse with her daughter, and to
entreat her to depart before Ethel's arrival. Her violence might almost
seem madness; but all people who live in solitude become to a certain
degree insane. Their views of things are not corrected by comparing them
with those of others; and the strangest want of proportion always reigns
in their ideas and sentiments.




CHAPTER XVII


So loth we part from all we love,
From all the links that bind us;
So turn our hearts, where'er we rove,
To those we've left behind us.

THOMAS MOORE.


On the following morning Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry drove to the Vale of
Bewling. It was the last day of February. The March winds were hushed as
yet; the breezes were balmy, the sunshine cheerful; a few soft clouds
flecked the heavens, and the blue sky appeared between them calm and
pure. Each passing air breathed life and happiness--it caressed the
cheek--and the swelling buds of the trees felt its quickening influence.
The almond-trees were in bloom--the pear blossoms began to whiten--the
tender green of the young leaves showed themselves here and there among
the hedges. The old lady felt the cheering influence, and would have
become even gay, had not the idea of the errand she was on checked her
spirits. Sometimes the remembrance that she was really going to see her
sister-in-law absolutely startled her; once or twice she thought of
turning back; she passed through the lanes, and then alighting from her
carriage, walked by a raised foot-way, across some arable fields--and
again through a little grove; the winding path made a turn, and dame
Nixon's white, low-roofed cottage was before her. Every thing about it
looked trim, but very humble: and it was unadorned during this early
season by the luxury of flowers and plants, which usually give even an
appearance of elegance to an English cottage. Mrs. Fitzhenry opened the
little gate--her knees trembled as she walked through the scanty garden,
which breathed of the new-sprung violets. The entrance to the cottage
was by the kitchen: she entered this, and found Margaret occupied by a
culinary preparation for her grandmother. Mrs. Fitzhenry asked after the
old woman's health, and thus gained a little time. Margaret answered in
her own former quiet yet cheerful voice; she was changed from what she
had been a few weeks before. The bloom had not returned to her cheeks,
but they no longer appeared streaked with deathly paleness; her motions
had lost the heaviness that showed a mind ill at ease. Mrs. Elizabeth
congratulated her on the restoration of her health.

"O yes," she replied, with a blush, "I am not the same creature I used
to be, thank God, and the angel he has sent us here;--if my poor
grandmother would but get well I should be quite happy; but that is
asking too much at her time of life."

The old lady made no further observations: she did not wish to hear the
praises of her sister-in-law. "Your lodger is still here?" at length she
said.

"Yes, God be praised!" replied Margaret.

"Will you give her my compliments, and say I am here, and that I wish to
see her."

"Yes, ma'am," said Margaret; "only the lady has refused to see any one,
and she does not like being asked."

"I do not wish to be impertinent or intrusive," answered Mrs. Elizabeth;
"only tell her my name, and if she makes any objection, of course she
will do as she likes. Where is she?"

"She is sitting with my poor grandmother; the nurse--Heaven bless her!
she would hire a nurse, to spare me, as she said--is lain down to sleep,
and she said she would watch by grandmother while I got the gruel; but
it's ready now, and I will go and tell her."

Away tripped Margaret, leaving her guest lost in wonder. Lady Lodore
watching the sick-bed of an old cottager--Lady Lodore immured in a
poverty-stricken abode, fit only for the poorer sort of country people.
It was more than strange, it was miraculous. "Yet she refused to
accompany poor Henry to America! there must be some strange mystery in
all this, that does not tell well for her."

So bitterly uncharitable was the unforgiving old lady towards her
brother's widow. She ruminated on these things for a minute or two, and
then Margaret came to usher her into the wicked one's presence. The
sitting-room destined for the lodger was neat, though very plain. The
walls were wainscotted and painted white,--the windows small and
latticed,--the furniture was old black, shining mahogany; the chairs
high-backed and clumsy; the table heavy and incommodious; the fire-place
large and airy; and the shelf of the mantel-piece almost as high as the
low ceiling: there were a few things of a more modern construction; a
comfortable sofa, a rose-wood bureau and large folding screen; near the
fire was a large easy chair of Gillows's manufacture, two light cane
ones, and two small tables; vases filled with hyacinths, jonquils, and
other spring flowers stood on one, and an embroidery frame occupied the
other. There was a perfume of fresh-gathered flowers in the room, which
the open window rendered very agreeable. Lady Lodore was standing near the
fire--(for Wilmot was not mistaken, and it was she indeed who now
presented herself to Mrs. Fitzhenry's eyes)--she might be agitated--she
did not show it--she came forward and held out her hand. "Dear Bessy,"
she said, "you are very kind to visit me; I thank you very much."

The poor recluse was overpowered. The cordiality of the greeting
frightened her: she who had come full of bitter reproach and hard
purposes, to be thanked with that sweet voice and smile. "I thought," at
length she stammered out, "that you did not wish to be known. I am glad
you are not offended, Cornelia."

"Offended by kindness? O no! It is true I did not wish--I do not wish
that it should be known that I am here--but since, by some strange
accident, you have discovered me, how can I help being grateful for your
visit? I am indeed glad to see you; it is so long since I have heard any
thing. Ah! dear Bessy, tell me, how is Ethel?"

Tears glistened in the mother's eyes: she asked many questions, and Mrs.
Fitzhenry a little recovered her self-possession, as she answered them.
She looked at Lady Lodore--she was changed--she could not fail of being
changed after so many years,--she was no longer a beautiful girl, but
she was a lovely woman. Despite the traces of years, which however
lightly they impressed, yet might be discerned; expression so
embellished her that it was impossible not to admire; brilliancy had
given place to softness, animation to serenity; still she was
fair--still her silken hair clustered on her brow, and her sweet eyes
were full of fire; her smile had more than its former charm--it came
from the heart.

Mrs. Fitzhenry was not, however, to be subdued by a little outward show.
She was there, who had betrayed and deserted (such were the energetic
words she was accustomed to employ) the noble, broken-hearted Lodore. The
thought steeled her purpose, and she contrived at last to ask whether
Lady Lodore was going to remain much longer in Essex?

"I have been going every day since I came here. In a few weeks I shall
certainly be gone. Why do you ask?"

"Because I thought--that is--you have made a secret of your being here,
and I expect Ethel in a day or two, and she would certainly discover
you."

"Why should she not?" asked Lady Lodore. "Why should you be averse to my
seeing Ethel?"

It is very difficult to say a disagreeable thing, especially to one
unaccustomed to society, and who is quite ignorant of the art of
concealing the sting of her intentions by flowery words. Mrs. Fitzhenry
said something about her sister-in-law's own wishes, and the desire
expressed by Lodore that there should be no intercourse between the mother
and daughter.

Cornelia's eyes flashed fire--"Am I," she exclaimed, "to be always the
sacrifice? Is my husband's vengeance to pursue me beyond his grave--even
till I reach mine? Unjust as he was, he would not have desired this."

Mrs. Elizabeth coloured with anger. Lady Lodore continued--"Pardon me,
Bessy, I do not wish to say any thing annoying to you or in blame of
Lodore. God knows I did him great wrong--but--"

"O Cornelia," cried the old lady, "do you indeed acknowledge that you
were to blame?"

Lady Lodore smiled, and said, "I were strangely blind to the defects of my
own character, and to the consequences of my actions, were I not conscious
of my errors; but retrospection is useless, and the punishment has
been--is--sufficiently severe. Lodore himself would not have perpetuated
his resentment, had he lived only a very little while longer. But I will
speak frankly to you, Bessy, as frankly as I may, and you shall decide
on my further stay here. From circumstances which it is immaterial to
explain, I have resolved on retiring into absolute solitude. I shall
never live in London again--never again see any of my old friends and
acquaintances. The course of my life is entirely changed; and whether I
live here or elsewhere, I shall live in obscurity and poverty. I do not
wish Ethel to know this. She would wish to assist me, and she has
scarcely enough for herself. I do not like being a burthen--I do not
like being pitied--I do not like being argued with, or to have my
actions commented upon. You know that my disposition was always
independent."

Mrs. Elizabeth assented with a sigh, casting up her eyes to heaven.

Lady Lodore smiled, and went on. "You think this is a strange place for me
to live in: whether here or elsewhere, I shall never live in any better: I
shall be fortunate if I find myself as well off when I leave Essex, for
the people here are good and honest, and the poor girl loves me,--it is
always pleasant to be loved."

A tear again filled Cornelia's eyes--she tried to animate herself to
smile. "I have nothing to love in all the wide world except Ethel; I do
love her; every one must love her--she is so gentle--so kind--so
warm-hearted and beautiful,--I love her more than my own heart's blood;
she is my child--part of that blood--part of myself--the better part; I
have seen little of her, but every look and word is engraved on my
heart. I love her voice--her smiles--the pressure of her soft white
hand. Pity me, dear Bessy, I am never to see any of these, which are all
that I love on earth, again. This idea fills me with regret--with
worse--with sorrow. There is a grave not far from here which contains
one you loved beyond all others,--what would you not give to see him
alive once again? To visit his tomb is a consolation to you. I must not
seen even the walls within which my blessed child lives. You alone can
help me--can be of comfort to me. Do not refuse--do not send me away. If
I leave this place, I shall go to some secluded nook in Wales, and be
quite--quite alone; the sun will shine, and the grass will grow at my
feet, but my heart will be dead within me, and I shall pine and die. I
have intended to do this; I have waited only till the sufferings of the
poor woman here should be at an end, that I may be of service to
Margaret, and then go. Your visit, which I fancied meant in kindness,
has put other thoughts into my head.

"Do not object to my staying here; let me remain; and do yet more for
me--come to me sometimes, and bring me tidings of my daughter--tell me
what she says--how she looks,--tell me that she is at each moment well
and happy. Ah! do this, dear Bessy, and I will bless you. I shall never
see her--at least not for years; there are many things to prevent it:
yet how could I drag out those years quite estranged from her? My heart
has died within me each time I have thought of it. But I can live as I
say; I shall expect you every now and then to come and talk to me of
her; she need never know that I am so near--she comes so seldom to
Essex. I shall soon be forgotten at Longfield. Will you consent? you
will do a kind action, and God will bless you."

Mrs. Fitzhenry was one of those persons who always find it difficult to
say, No; and Lady Lodore asked with so much earnestness that she commanded;
she felt that her request ought to be granted, and therefore it was
impossible to refuse it. Before she well knew what she had said, the
good lady had yielded her consent and received her sister-in-law's warm
and heart-felt thanks.

Mrs. Fitzhenry looked round the room: "But how can you think of staying
here, Cornelia?" she said; "this place is not fit for you. I should have
thought that you could never have endured such homely rooms."

"Do you think them so bad?" replied the lady; "I think them very
pleasant, for I have done with pride, and I find peace and comfort here.
Look," she continued, throwing open a door that led into the garden, "is
not that delightful? This garden is very pretty: that clear rivulet
murmurs by with so lulling a sound;--and look at these violets, are they
not beautiful? I have planted a great many flowers, and they will soon
come up. Do you not know how pleasant it is to watch the shrubs we
plant, and water, and rear ourselves?--to see the little green shoots
peep out, and the leaves unfold, and then the flower blossom and expand,
diffusing its delicious odour around,--all, as it were, created by
oneself, by one's own nursing, out of a bit of stick or an ugly bulb?
This place is very pretty, I assure you: when the leaves are on the
trees they make a bower, and the grove behind the house is shady, and
leads to lanes and fields more beautiful than any I ever saw. I have
loitered for hours in this garden, and been quite happy. Now I shall be
happier than ever, thanks to you. You will not forget me. Come as often
as you can. You say that you expect Ethel soon?"

Lady Ladore walked with her sister-in-law to the garden-gate, and
beyond, through the little copse, still talking of her daughter. "I
cannot go further," she said, at last, "without a bonnet--so good-bye,
dear Bessy. Come soon. Thank you--thank you for this visit."

She held out her hand: Mrs. Fitzhenry took it, pressed it, a half
feeling came over her as if she were about to kiss the check of her
offending relative, but her heart hardened, she blushed, and muttering
a hasty good-bye, she hurried away. She was bewildered, and after
walking a few steps, she turned round, and saw again the white dress of
Cornelia, as a turn in the path hid her. The grand, the exclusive Lady
Lodore--the haughty, fashionable, worldly-heartless wife thus metamorphosed
into a tender-hearted mother--suing to her for crumbs of charitable
love--and hiding all her boasted advantages in that low-roofed cottage!
What could it all mean?

Mrs. Fitzhenry walked on. Again she thought, "How odd! I went there,
determining to persuade her to go away, and miserable at the thoughts of
seeing her only once; and now I have promised to visit her often, and
agreed that she shall live here. Have I not done wrong? What would my
poor brother say? Yet I could not refuse. Poor thing! how could I
refuse, when she said that she had nothing else to live for? Besides, to
go away and live alone in Wales--it would be too dreadful; and she
thanked me as if she were so grateful. I hope I have not done wrong.

"But how strange it is that Henry's widow should have become so poor;
she has given up a part of her income to Ethel, but a great deal
remains. What can she have done with it? She is mysterious, and there is
never any good in mystery. Who knows what she may have to conceal?" Mrs.
Elizabeth got in her carriage, and each step of the horses took her
farther from the web of enchantment which Cornelia had thrown over her.
"She is always strange,"--thus ran her meditations; "and how am I to see
her, and no one find it out? and what a story for Longfield, that Lady
Lodore should be living in poverty in dame Nixon's cottage. I forgot to
tell her that--I forgot to say so many things I meant to say--I don't know
why, except that she talked so much, and I did not know how to bring in
my objections. But it cannot be right: and Ethel in her long rambles and
rides with Miss Derham or Mr. Villiers, will be sure to find her out. I
wish I had not seen her--I will write and tell her I have changed my
mind, and entreat her to go away."

As it occurs to all really good-natured persons, it was very
disagreeable to Mrs. Fitzhenry to be angry, and she visited the
ill-temper so engendered on the head of poor Cornelia. She disturbed
herself by the idea of all the disagreeable things that might happen--of
her sister-in-law's positive refusal to go; the very wording which she
imagined for her intended letter puzzled and irritated her. She no
longer felt the breath of spring as pleasant, but sat back in the
chariot, "nursing her wrath to keep it warm." When she reached her home,
Ethel's carriage was at her door.

The meeting, as ever, between aunt and niece was affectionate. Fanny was
welcomed, the baby was kissed, and little Clorinda admired, but the
theme nearest Ethel's heart was speedily introduced--her mother. The
disquietudes she felt on her account--Mr. Saville's journey to
Paris--the visit of Villiers to Wales to discover her place of
concealment--the inutility of all their endeavours.

"But why are they so anxious?" asked her aunt; "I can understand you:
you have some fantastic notion about your mother, but how can Mr.
Villiers desire so very much to find her?"

"I could almost say," said Ethel, "that Edward is more eager than
myself, though I should wrong my own affection and gratitude; but he was
more unjust towards her, and thus he feels the weight of obligation more
keenly; but, perhaps, dear aunt, you do not know all that my dearest
mother has done for us--the unparalleled sacrifices she has made."

Then Ethel went on to tell her all that Mr. Gayland had
communicated--the sale of her jointure--the very small residue of money
she had kept for herself--the entire payment of Villiers's debts--and
afterwards the surrender of the remainder of her income and of her house
to them. Her eyes glistened as she spoke; her heart, overflowing with
admiration and affection, shone in her beautiful face, her voice was
pregnant with sensibility, and her expressions full of deep feeling.

Mrs. Elizabeth's heart was not of stone--far from it; it was, except in
the one instance of her sister-in-law, made of pliable materials. She
heard Ethel's story--she caught by sympathy the tenderness and pity she
poured forth--she thought of Lady Lodore at the cottage, a dwelling so
unlike any she had ever inhabited before--poverty-stricken and mean; she
remembered her praises of it--her cheerfulness--the simplicity of taste
which she displayed--the light-hearted content with which she spoke of
every privation except the absence of Ethel. What before was mysterious
wrong, was now manifest heroism. The loftiness and generosity of her
mind rose upon the old lady unclouded; her own uncharitable deductions
stung her with remorse; she continued to listen, and Ethel to narrate,
and the big tears gathered in her eyes, and rolled down her venerable
cheeks,--tears at once of repentance and admiration.




CHAPTER XVIII


Repentance is a tender sprite;
If aught on earth have heavenly might,
'Tis lodged within her silent tear.

WORDSWORTH.


Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry was not herself aware of all that Lady Lodore had
suffered, or the extent of her sacrifices. She guessed darkly at them,
but it was the detail that rendered them so painful, and, but for their
motive, humiliating to one nursed in luxury, and accustomed to all those
intermediate servitors and circumstances, which stand between the rich
and the bare outside of the working-day world. Cornelia shrunk from the
address of those she did not know, and from the petty acts of daily
life, which had gone on before without her entering into their detail.

Her illness at Newbury had been severe. She was attacked by the scarlet
fever; the doctor had ordered her to be removed from the bustle of the
inn, and a furnished villa had been taken for her, while she could only
give a languid assent to propositions which she understood confusedly.
She was a long time very ill--a long time weak and slowly convalescent.
At length health dawned on her, accompanied by a disposition attuned to
content and a wish for tranquillity. Her residence was retired,
commodious, and pretty; she was pleased with it, she did not wish to
remove, and was glad to procrastinate from day to day any consideration
of the future. Thus it was a long time before the strength of her
thoughts and purposes was renewed, or that she began to think seriously
of where she was, and what she was going to do.

During the half delirium, the disturbed and uncontrollable, but not
unmeaning reveries, of her fever, the idea of visiting Lodore's grave had
haunted her pertinaciously. She had often dreamt of it: at one time the
tomb seemed to rise in a lonely desert; and the dead slept peacefully
beneath sunshine or starlight. At another, storms and howling winds were
around, groans and sighs, mingled with the sound of the tempest, and
menaces and reproaches against her were breathed from the cold marble.
Now her imagination pictured it within the aisles of a magnificent
cathedral; and now again the real scene--the rustic church of Longfield
was vividly present to her mind. She saw the pathway through the green
churchyard--the ruined ivy-mantled tower, which showed how much larger
the edifice had been in former days, near which might be still discerned
on high a niche containing the holy mother and divine child--the
half-defaced porch on which rude monkish imagery was carved--the
time-worn pews, and painted window. She had never entered this church
but once, many, many years ago; and it was strange how in sleep and
fever-troubled reverie, each portion of it presented itself distinctly
and vividly to her imagination. During these perturbed visions, one
other form and voice perpetually recurred. She heard Ethel continually
repeat, "Come! come!" and often her figure flitted round the tomb or sat
beside it. Once, on awakening from a dream, which impressed her deeply
by the importunity and earnestness of her daughter's appeal, she was
forcibly impelled to consider it her duty to obey, and she made a vow
that on recovering from her illness, she would visit her husband's
grave.

Now while pondering on the humiliations and cheerless necessities which
darkened her future, and rousing herself to form some kind of resolution
concerning them, this dream was repeated, and on awakening, the memory
of her forgotten vow renewed itself in her. She dwelt on it with
pleasure. Here was something to be done that was not mere wretchedness
and lonely wandering--something that, connecting her with the past, took
away the sense of desertion and solitude, so hard to bear. In the
morning, at breakfast, it so chanced that she read in the Morning Herald
a little paragraph announcing that Viscount Maristow was entertaining a
party of friends at Maristow Castle, among whom were Mr. and Mrs.
Villiers, and the Hon. Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry. This was a fortunate
coincidence. The dragon ceased for a moment to watch the garden, and she
might avail herself of its absence to visit its treasure unnoticed and
unknown. She put her project into immediate execution. She crossed the
country, passing through London on her way to Longfield--she arrived.
Without delay she fulfilled her purpose. She entered the church and
viewed the tablet, inscribed simply with the name of Lodore, and the date
of his birth and death. The words were few and common-place, but they were
eloquent to her. They told her that the cold decaying shape lay beneath,
which in the pride of life and love had clasped her in its arms as its
own for evermore. Short-lived had been the possession. She had loosened
the tie even while thought and feeling ruled the now insentient
brain--he had been scarcely less dead to her while inhabiting the
distant Illinois, than now that a stone placed above him, gave visible
token of his material presence, and the eternal absence of his immortal
part. Cornelia had never before felt so sensibly that she had been a
wife neglecting her duties, despising a vow she had solemnly pledged,
estranging herself from him, who by religious ordinance, and the laws of
society, alone had privilege to protect and love her. Nor had she before
felt so intimately the change--that she was a widow; that her lover, her
husband, the father of her child, the forsaken, dead Lodore, was indeed
no part of the tissue of life, action, and feeling to which she
belonged.

Solitude and sickness had before awakened many thoughts in her mind, and
she recalled them as she sat beside her dead husband's grave. She looked
into her motives, tried to understand the deceits she had practised on
herself, and to purify her conscience. She meditated on time, that law
of the world, which is so mysterious, and so potent; ruling us
despotically, and yet wholly unappreciated till we think upon it.
Petrarch says, that he was never so young, but that he knew that he was
growing old. Lady Lodore had never thought of this till a few months back;
it seemed to her, that she had never known it until now--that she felt that
she was older--older than the vain and lovely bride of Lodore--than the
haughty high-spirited friend of Casimir Lyzinski. And where was Casimir?
She had never heard of him again, she had scarcely ever thought of him;
he had grown older too--change, the effects of passion or of destiny,
must have visited him also;--they were all embarked on one mighty
stream--Lodore had gained a haven; but the living were still at the
mercy of the vast torrent--whither would it hurry them?

There was a charm in these melancholy and speculative thoughts to the
beautiful exile--for we may be indeed as easily exiled by a few roods of
ground, as by mountains and seas. A strong decree of fate banished
Cornelia from the familiar past, into an unknown and strange present.
Still she clung to the recollection of bygone years, and for the first
time gave way to reflections full of scenes and persons to be seen no
more. The tomb beside which she lingered, was an outward sign of these
past events, and she did not like to lose sight of it so soon. She heard
that Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry was to remain away for a month--so much
time at least was hers. She inquired for lodgings, and was directed to
Dame Nixon's cottage. She was somewhat dismayed at first by its
penurious appearance, but "it would do for a few days;" and she found
that what would serve for a few days, might serve for months.


"Man wants but little here below,
Nor wants that little long."


Most true for
solitary man. It is society that increases his desires. If Lady Lodore had
been visited in her humble dwelling by the least regarded among her
acquaintances, she would have felt keenly its glaring deficiencies. But
although used to luxury, Margaret's cuisine sufficed for herself alone;
the low-roofed rooms were high enough, and the latticed windows which
let in the light of heaven, fulfilled their purpose as well as the
plate-glass and lofty embrasures of a palace.

Lady Lodore was obliged also to consider one other thing, which forms so
large a portion of our meditations in real life--her purse. She found when
settled in the cottage, in the Vale of Bewling, that her stock of money
was reduced to one hundred pounds. She could not cross the country and
establish herself at a distance from London with this sum only. She had
before looked forward to selling her jewels and carriage as to a distant
event, but now she felt that it was the _next_ thing she must do. She
shrunk from it naturally: the very idea of revisiting London--of seeing
its busy shops and streets--once so full of life and its purposes to
her, and in which she would now wander an alien, was inconceivably
saddening; she was willing to put off the necessity as long as possible,
and thus continued to procrastinate her departure from Essex.

Mrs. Fitzhenry returned; but she could neither know nor dream of the
vicinity of her sister-in-law. We are apt to think, when we know nothing
of any one, that no one knows any thing of us; experience can scarcely
teach us, that the reverse of this is often the truth. Seeing only an
old woman in her dotage--and a poor love-sick girl, who knew nothing
beyond the one event which had blasted all her happiness--she never
heard the inhabitants of Longfield mentioned, and believed that she was
equally unheard of by them. Then her indisposition protracted her stay,
and now the mortal illness of the poor woman. For she had become
interested for Margaret and promised to befriend her; and in case of her
grandmother's death, to take her from a spot where every association and
appearance kept open the wounds inflicted by her unfaithful lover.

Time had thus passed on: now sad, now cheerful, she tried to banish
every thought of the future, and to make the occurrences of each day
fill and satisfy her mind. She lived obscurely and humbly, and perhaps
as wisely as mortal may in this mysterious world, where hope is
perpetually followed by disappointment, and action by repentance and
regret. The days succeeded to each other in one unvaried tenor. The
weather was cheerful, the breath of spring animating. She watched the
swelling of the buds--the peeping heads of the crocuses--the opening of
the anemones and wild wind-flowers, and at last, the sweet odour of the
new-born violets, with all the interest created by novelty; not that she
had not observed and watched these things before, with transitory
pleasure, but now the operations of nature filled all her world; the
earth was no longer merely the dwelling place of her acquaintance, the
stage on which the business of society was carried on, but the mother of
life--the temple of God--the beautiful and varied store-house of
bounteous nature.

Dwelling on these ideas, Cornelia often thought of Horatio Saville,
whose conversations, now remembered, were the source whence she drew the
knowledge and poetry of her present reveries. As solitude and nature
grew lovely in her eyes, she yearned yet more fondly for the one who
could embellish all she saw. Yet while her mind needed a companion so
congenial to her present feelings, her heart was fuller of Ethel; her
affection for Saville was a calm though deep-rooted sentiment, resulting
from the conviction, that she should find entire happiness if united to
him, and in an esteem or rather an enthusiastic admiration of his
talents and virtues, that led her to dwell with complacency on the hope,
that he still remembered and loved her: but the human heart is jealous,
and with difficulty admits two emotions of equal force, and her love for
her daughter was the master passion. The instinct of nature spoke
audibly within her; the atoms of her frame seemed alive each one as she
thought of her; often her tears flowed, often her eyes brightened with
gladness when alone, and the beloved image of her beautiful daughter as
she saw her last, smiling amidst penury and indignity, was her dearest
companion by day and night. She alone made her present situation
endurable, and yet separation from her was irksome beyond expression.
Was she never to see or hear of her more? It was very hard: she implored
Providence to change the harsh decree--she longed inexpressibly for one
word that had reference to her--one event, however slight, which should
make her existence palpable.

When Margaret announced Mrs. Fitzhenry, her heart bounded with joy. She
could ask concerning Ethel--hear; her countenance was radiant with
delight, and she really for a moment thought her sister-in-law's visit
was meant in kindness, since so much pleasure was the result. This
conviction had produced the very thing it anticipated. She had given
poor Bessy no time to announce the actual intention with which she came;
she had borne away her sullen mood by force of sweet smiles and sweeter
words; and saw her depart with gladdened spirits, whispering to herself
the fresh hopes and fond emotions which filled her bosom. She walked
back to her little garden and stooped to gather some fresh violets, and
to prop a drooping jonquil heavy with its burthen of sweet blooms. She
inhaled the vernal odours with rapture. "Yes," she thought, "nature is
the refuge and home for women: they have no public career--no aim nor
end beyond their domestic circle; but they can extend that, and make all
the creations of nature their own, to foster and do good to. We
complain, when shut up in cities of the niggard rules of society, which
gives us only the drawing-room or ball-room in which to display our
talents, and which, for ever turning the sympathy of those around us
into envy on the part of women, or what is called love on that of men,
besets our path with dangers or sorrows. But throw aside all vanity, no
longer seek to surpass your own sex, nor to inspire the other with
feelings which are pregnant with disquiet or misery, and which seldom
end in mutual benevolence, turn your steps to the habitation which God
has given as befitting his creatures, contemplate the lovely ornaments
with which he has blessed the earth;--here is no heart-burning nor
calumny; it is better to love, to be of use to one of these flowers,
than to be the admired of the many--the mere puppet of one's own
vanity."

Lady Lodore entered the house; she asked concerning her poor hostess, and
learnt that she slept. For a short time she employed herself with her
embroidery; her thoughts were all awake; and as her fingers created
likenesses of the flowers she loved, several times her eyes filled with
tears as she thought of Ethel, and how happy she could be if her fate
permitted her to cultivate her affection and enjoy her society.

"It is very sad," she thought; "only a few minutes ago my spirits were
buoyant, gladdened as they were by Bessy's visit; but they flag again,
when I think of my loneliness and the unreplying silence of this place.
What is to become of me? I shall remain here: yes; I shall not banish
myself to some inhospitable nook, where I should never hear her name.
But am I not to see her again? Am I to be nothing to her? Is she
satisfied with my absence--and are they all--to whom I am bound by ties
of consanguinity or affection, indifferent to the knowledge of whether I
exist or not? Nothing gives token to them of my life; it is as if the
grave had closed abruptly over me--and had it closed, thus I should have
been mourned, in coldness and neglect."

Again her eyes were suffused; but as she wiped away the blinding tears,
she was recalled from her reflections by the bright rays of the sun
which entered her little room. She threw open the door, stepped out into
the garden--the sun was setting; the atmosphere was calm, and lighted up
by golden beams; the few clouds were dyed in the same splendid hues, the
birds sent forth a joyous song at intervals, and a band of rooks passed
above the little wood, cawing loudly. The air was balmy, the
indescribable freshness of spring was abroad, interpenetrating and
cheerful. Cornelia's melancholy fled as she felt and gave way to its
influence. "God blesses all things," she thought, "and he will also
bless me. Much wrong have I done, but love pure and disinterested is in
my heart, and I shall be repaid. My own sweet Ethel! I have sacrificed
every thing except my life for your sake, and I would add my life to the
gift, could it avail you. I ask but for you and your love. The world has
many blessings, and I have asked for them before, with tears and
anguish, but I give up all now, except you, my child. You are all the
world to me! Will you not come, even now, as I implore Heaven to give
you to me?"

She raised her eyes in prayer, and it seemed as if her wishes were to be
accomplished--surely once in a life God will grant the earnest entreaty
of a loving heart. Cornelia believed that he would, that happiness was
near at hand, and life not all a blank. She heard a rustling among the
trees, a light step;--was it Margaret? She had scarcely asked herself
this question, when the dear object of her every thought and hope was
before her--in her arms;--Ethel had entered from the wood, had seen her
mother, had sprung forward and clasped her to her heart.

"My dear, dear child!"

"Dearest mother!" repeated Ethel, as her eyes were filled with tears of
delight, "why did you go--why conceal yourself? You do not know the
anxiety we have suffered, and how very unhappy your absence has made us.
But I have found you--of all that have gone to seek you, I have found
you; I deserve this reward, for I love you most of all."

Lady Lodore returned her daughter's caresses--and her tears flowed fast for
very joy, and then she turned to Mrs. Fitzhenry, who followed Ethel, but
who had been outspeeded by her in her eagerness. The old lady's face was
beaming with happiness. "Ah, Bessy, you have betrayed me--traitress! I
did not expect this--I do not deserve such excessive happiness."

"You deserve all, and much more than we can any of us bestow," cried
Ethel, "except that your dear generous heart will repay you beyond any
reward we can give, and you will be blest in the happiness we owe to you
alone. Edward is gone far away into Wales in quest of you."

"An Angelica run after by the Paladins," said Lady Lodore, smiling through
her tears.

"Paladins, worthy the name!" replied Ethel. "Horatio is even now on the
salt seas for your sake--he is returning discomfited and hopeless from
his journey of discovery to the Pyrenees--his zeal almost deserved the
reward which I have found, yet who but she, for whom you sacrificed so
much, ought to be the first to thank you? And while we all try to show
you an inexpressible gratitude, ought not I to be the first to see,
first to kiss, first--always the first--to love you?"




CONCLUSION


None, I trust,
Repines at these delights, they are free and harmless:
After distress at sea, the dangers o'er,
Safety and welcomes better taste ashore.

FORD.


Thus the tale of "Lodore" is ended. The person who bore that title by right
of descent, has long slept in peace in the church of his native village.
Neither his own passions, nor those of others, can renew the pulsations
of his heart. "The silver cord is loosed, and the pitcher broken at the
fountain." His life had not been fruitless. The sedulous care and
admirable education he had bestowed on Ethel, would, had he lived, have
compensated to him for his many sufferings, and been a source of pure
and unfading joy to the end. He was not destined in this world to reap
the harvest of his virtues, though his errors had been punished
severely. Still his memory is the presiding genius of his daughter's
life, and the name of Lodore contains for her a spell that dignifies
existence in her own eyes, and incites her to render all her thoughts
and actions such as her beloved father would have approved. It was fated
that the evil which he did should die with him--but the good out-lived
him long, and was a blessing to those whom he loved far better than
himself.

She who received the title on her marriage, henceforth continued her
existence under another; and the wife of Saville, who soon after became
Viscountess Maristow, loses her right to be chronicled in these pages.
So few years indeed are passed since the period to which the last
chapter brought us, that it may be safely announced that Cornelia
Santerre possesses that happiness, through her generosity and devoted
affection, which she had lost through pride and self-exaltation. She
wonders at her past self--and laments the many opportunities she lost
for benefiting others, and proving herself worthy of their attachment.
Her pride is gone, or rather, her pride is now placed in redeeming her
faults. She is humble, knowing how much she was deceived in herself--she
is forgiving, for she feels that she needs forgiveness. She looks on the
track of years she has passed over as wasted, and she wishes to retrieve
their loss. She respects, admires, in some sense it may be said, that
she adores her husband; but even while consenting to be his, and thus
securing her own happiness, she told him that her first duties were
towards Ethel--and that he took a divided heart, over the better part of
which reigned maternal love. Saville, the least egoistic of human
beings, smiled to hear her name that a defect, which was in his eyes her
crowning virtue.

Edward Villiers learnt to prize worldly prosperity at its true value,
and each day blesses the train of circumstances that led him to wed
Ethel, even though poverty and suffering had followed close behind.
Ethel herself might be said to have been always happy. She was incapable
of being impressed by any sorrow, that did not touch her for another's
sake: and while she exerted herself to alleviate the pain endured by
those she loved, she passed on unhurt. Heaven spared her life's most
cruel evils. Death had done its worst when she lost her father. Now,
surrounded by dear friends, and the object of her husband's constant
tenderness, she pursues a tranquil course: which for any one to consider
the most blissful allotted to mortals, they must have a heart like her
own--faithful, affectionate, and generous.

Mrs. Elizabeth Fitzhenry, kind and gentle aunt Bessy, always felt her
heaven clouded while she indulged in her aversion to her sister-in-law.
She is happy now that she is reconciled to Cornelia; strange to say, she
loves her even more than she loves Ethel--she is more intimately
connected in her mind with the memory of Lodore. She often visits her at
Maristow Castle; in the neighbourhood of which Margaret is settled,
being happily married. Colonel Villiers still lives in Paris. He is in a
miserable state of poverty, difficulty, and ill-health. His wife has
deserted him: he neglected and outraged her, and she in a fit of remorse
left him, and returned to nurse her father during a lingering illness,
which is likely to continue to the end of his life, though he shows no
symptoms of immediate decay. He is eager to lavish all his wealth on his
child, if he can be sure that no portion of it is shared by her husband.
With infinite difficulty, and at the cost of many privations, she, with
a true woman's feeling, contrives to send him remittances now and then,
though she receives in return neither thanks nor kindness. He pursues a
course of dissipation in its most degraded form--a wretched hanger-on at
resorts, misnamed of pleasure--gambling while he has any money to
lose--trying to ruin others as he has been ruined.

Thus we have done our duty, in bringing under view, in a brief summary,
the little that there is to tell of the personages who formed the drama
of this tale. One only remains to be mentioned: but it is not in a few
tame lines that we can revert to the varied fate of Fanny Derham. She
continued for some time among her beloved friends, innocent and calm as
she was beautiful and wise; circumstances at last led her away from
them, and she has entered upon life. One who feels so deeply for others,
and yet is so stern a censor over herself--at once so sensitive and so
rigidly conscientious--so single-minded and upright, and yet open as day
to charity and affection, cannot hope to pass from youth to age
unharmed. Deceit, and selfishness, and the whole web of human passion
must envelope her, and occasion her many sorrows; and the unworthiness
of her fellow-creatures inflict infinite pain on her noble heart: still
she cannot be contaminated--she will turn neither to the right nor left,
but pursue her way unflinching; and, in her lofty idea of the dignity of
her nature, in her love of truth and in her integrity, she will find
support and reward in her various fortunes. What the events are, that
have already diversified her existence, cannot now be recounted; and it
would require the gift of prophecy to foretell the conclusion. In after
times these may be told, and the life of Fanny Derham be presented as a
useful lesson, at once to teach what goodness and genius can achieve in
palliating the woes of life, and to encourage those, who would in any
way imitate her, by an example of calumny refuted by patience, errors
rectified by charity, and the passions of our nature purified and
ennobled by an underviating observance of those moral laws on which all
human excellence is founded--a love of truth in ourselves, and a sincere
sympathy with our fellow-creatures.




THE END







VOL. I.




INTRODUCTION.


I visited Naples in the year 1818. On the 8th of December of that year,
my companion and I crossed the Bay, to visit the antiquities which are
scattered on the shores of Baiæ. The translucent and shining waters of
the calm sea covered fragments of old Roman villas, which were
interlaced by sea-weed, and received diamond tints from the chequering
of the sun-beams; the blue and pellucid element was such as Galatea
might have skimmed in her car of mother of pearl; or Cleopatra, more
fitly than the Nile, have chosen as the path of her magic ship. Though
it was winter, the atmosphere seemed more appropriate to early spring;
and its genial warmth contributed to inspire those sensations of placid
delight, which are the portion of every traveller, as he lingers, loath
to quit the tranquil bays and radiant promontories of Baiæ.

We visited the so called Elysian Fields and Avernus; and wandered
through various ruined temples, baths, and classic spots; at length we
entered the gloomy cavern of the Cumæan Sibyl. Our Lazzeroni bore
flaring torches, which shone red, and almost dusky, in the murky
subterranean passages, whose darkness thirstily surrounding them,
seemed eager to imbibe more and more of the element of light. We passed
by a natural archway, leading to a second gallery, and enquired, if we
could not enter there also. The guides pointed to the reflection of
their torches on the water that paved it, leaving us to form our own
conclusion; but adding it was a pity, for it led to the Sibyl’s Cave.
Our curiosity and enthusiasm were excited by this circumstance, and we
insisted upon attempting the passage. As is usually the case in the
prosecution of such enterprizes, the difficulties decreased on
examination. We found, on each side of the humid pathway, “dry land for
the sole of the foot.” At length we arrived at a large, desert, dark
cavern, which the Lazzeroni assured us was the Sibyl’s Cave. We were
sufficiently disappointed—Yet we examined it with care, as if its
blank, rocky walls could still bear trace of celestial visitant. On one
side was a small opening. Whither does this lead? we asked: can we
enter here?—“_Questo poi, no,_”—said the wild looking savage, who held
the torch; “you can advance but a short distance, and nobody visits
it.”

“Nevertheless, I will try it,” said my companion; “it may lead to the
real cavern. Shall I go alone, or will you accompany me?”

I signified my readiness to proceed, but our guides protested against
such a measure. With great volubility, in their native Neapolitan
dialect, with which we were not very familiar, they told us that there
were spectres, that the roof would fall in, that it was too narrow to
admit us, that there was a deep hole within, filled with water, and we
might be drowned. My friend shortened the harangue, by taking the man’s
torch from him; and we proceeded alone.

The passage, which at first scarcely admitted us, quickly grew narrower
and lower; we were almost bent double; yet still we persisted in making
our way through it. At length we entered a wider space, and the low
roof heightened; but, as we congratulated ourselves on this change, our
torch was extinguished by a current of air, and we were left in utter
darkness. The guides bring with them materials for renewing the light,
but we had none—our only resource was to return as we came. We groped
round the widened space to find the entrance, and after a time fancied
that we had succeeded. This proved however to be a second passage,
which evidently ascended. It terminated like the former; though
something approaching to a ray, we could not tell whence, shed a very
doubtful twilight in the space. By degrees, our eyes grew somewhat
accustomed to this dimness, and we perceived that there was no direct
passage leading us further; but that it was possible to climb one side
of the cavern to a low arch at top, which promised a more easy path,
from whence we now discovered that this light proceeded. With
considerable difficulty we scrambled up, and came to another passage
with still more of illumination, and this led to another ascent like
the former.

After a succession of these, which our resolution alone permitted us to
surmount, we arrived at a wide cavern with an arched dome-like roof. An
aperture in the midst let in the light of heaven; but this was
overgrown with brambles and underwood, which acted as a veil, obscuring
the day, and giving a solemn religious hue to the apartment. It was
spacious, and nearly circular, with a raised seat of stone, about the
size of a Grecian couch, at one end. The only sign that life had been
here, was the perfect snow-white skeleton of a goat, which had probably
not perceived the opening as it grazed on the hill above, and had
fallen headlong. Ages perhaps had elapsed since this catastrophe; and
the ruin it had made above, had been repaired by the growth of
vegetation during many hundred summers.

The rest of the furniture of the cavern consisted of piles of leaves,
fragments of bark, and a white filmy substance, resembling the inner
part of the green hood which shelters the grain of the unripe Indian
corn. We were fatigued by our struggles to attain this point, and
seated ourselves on the rocky couch, while the sounds of tinkling
sheep-bells, and shout of shepherd-boy, reached us from above.

At length my friend, who had taken up some of the leaves strewed about,
exclaimed, “This _is_ the Sibyl’s cave; these are Sibylline leaves.” On
examination, we found that all the leaves, bark, and other substances,
were traced with written characters. What appeared to us more
astonishing, was that these writings were expressed in various
languages: some unknown to my companion, ancient Chaldee, and Egyptian
hieroglyphics, old as the Pyramids. Stranger still, some were in modern
dialects, English and Italian. We could make out little by the dim
light, but they seemed to contain prophecies, detailed relations of
events but lately passed; names, now well known, but of modern date;
and often exclamations of exultation or woe, of victory or defeat, were
traced on their thin scant pages. This was certainly the Sibyl’s Cave;
not indeed exactly as Virgil describes it; but the whole of this land
had been so convulsed by earthquake and volcano, that the change was
not wonderful, though the traces of ruin were effaced by time; and we
probably owed the preservation of these leaves, to the accident which
had closed the mouth of the cavern, and the swift-growing vegetation
which had rendered its sole opening impervious to the storm. We made a
hasty selection of such of the leaves, whose writing one at least of us
could understand; and then, laden with our treasure, we bade adieu to
the dim hypæthric cavern, and after much difficulty succeeded in
rejoining our guides.

During our stay at Naples, we often returned to this cave, sometimes
alone, skimming the sun-lit sea, and each time added to our store.
Since that period, whenever the world’s circumstance has not
imperiously called me away, or the temper of my mind impeded such
study, I have been employed in deciphering these sacred remains. Their
meaning, wondrous and eloquent, has often repaid my toil, soothing me
in sorrow, and exciting my imagination to daring flights, through the
immensity of nature and the mind of man. For awhile my labours were not
solitary; but that time is gone; and, with the selected and matchless
companion of my toils, their dearest reward is also lost to me—

Di mie tenere frondi altro lavoro
Credea mostrarte; e qual fero pianeta
Ne’ nvidiò insieme, o mio nobil tesoro?


I present the public with my latest discoveries in the slight Sibylline
pages. Scattered and unconnected as they were, I have been obliged to
add links, and model the work into a consistent form. But the main
substance rests on the truths contained in these poetic rhapsodies, and
the divine intuition which the Cumæan damsel obtained from heaven.

I have often wondered at the subject of her verses, and at the English
dress of the Latin poet. Sometimes I have thought, that, obscure and
chaotic as they are, they owe their present form to me, their
decipherer. As if we should give to another artist, the painted
fragments which form the mosaic copy of Raphael’s Transfiguration in
St. Peter’s; he would put them together in a form, whose mode would be
fashioned by his own peculiar mind and talent. Doubtless the leaves of
the Cumæan Sibyl have suffered distortion and diminution of interest
and excellence in my hands. My only excuse for thus transforming them,
is that they were unintelligible in their pristine condition.

My labours have cheered long hours of solitude, and taken me out of a
world, which has averted its once benignant face from me, to one
glowing with imagination and power. Will my readers ask how I could
find solace from the narration of misery and woeful change? This is one
of the mysteries of our nature, which holds full sway over me, and from
whose influence I cannot escape. I confess, that I have not been
unmoved by the development of the tale; and that I have been depressed,
nay, agonized, at some parts of the recital, which I have faithfully
transcribed from my materials. Yet such is human nature, that the
excitement of mind was dear to me, and that the imagination, painter of
tempest and earthquake, or, worse, the stormy and ruin-fraught passions
of man, softened my real sorrows and endless regrets, by clothing these
fictitious ones in that ideality, which takes the mortal sting from
pain.

I hardly know whether this apology is necessary. For the merits of my
adaptation and translation must decide how far I have well bestowed my
time and imperfect powers, in giving form and substance to the frail
and attenuated Leaves of the Sibyl.




CHAPTER I.


I am the native of a sea-surrounded nook, a cloud-enshadowed land,
which, when the surface of the globe, with its shoreless ocean and
trackless continents, presents itself to my mind, appears only as an
inconsiderable speck in the immense whole; and yet, when balanced in
the scale of mental power, far outweighed countries of larger extent
and more numerous population. So true it is, that man’s mind alone was
the creator of all that was good or great to man, and that Nature
herself was only his first minister. England, seated far north in the
turbid sea, now visits my dreams in the semblance of a vast and
well-manned ship, which mastered the winds and rode proudly over the
waves. In my boyish days she was the universe to me. When I stood on my
native hills, and saw plain and mountain stretch out to the utmost
limits of my vision, speckled by the dwellings of my countrymen, and
subdued to fertility by their labours, the earth’s very centre was
fixed for me in that spot, and the rest of her orb was as a fable, to
have forgotten which would have cost neither my imagination nor
understanding an effort.

My fortunes have been, from the beginning, an exemplification of the
power that mutability may possess over the varied tenor of man’s life.
With regard to myself, this came almost by inheritance. My father was
one of those men on whom nature had bestowed to prodigality the envied
gifts of wit and imagination, and then left his bark of life to be
impelled by these winds, without adding reason as the rudder, or
judgment as the pilot for the voyage. His extraction was obscure; but
circumstances brought him early into public notice, and his small
paternal property was soon dissipated in the splendid scene of fashion
and luxury in which he was an actor. During the short years of
thoughtless youth, he was adored by the high-bred triflers of the day,
nor least by the youthful sovereign, who escaped from the intrigues of
party, and the arduous duties of kingly business, to find never-failing
amusement and exhilaration of spirit in his society. My father’s
impulses, never under his own controul, perpetually led him into
difficulties from which his ingenuity alone could extricate him; and
the accumulating pile of debts of honour and of trade, which would have
bent to earth any other, was supported by him with a light spirit and
tameless hilarity; while his company was so necessary at the tables and
assemblies of the rich, that his derelictions were considered venial,
and he himself received with intoxicating flattery.

This kind of popularity, like every other, is evanescent: and the
difficulties of every kind with which he had to contend, increased in a
frightful ratio compared with his small means of extricating himself.
At such times the king, in his enthusiasm for him, would come to his
relief, and then kindly take his friend to task; my father gave the
best promises for amendment, but his social disposition, his craving
for the usual diet of admiration, and more than all, the fiend of
gambling, which fully possessed him, made his good resolutions
transient, his promises vain. With the quick sensibility peculiar to
his temperament, he perceived his power in the brilliant circle to be
on the wane. The king married; and the haughty princess of Austria, who
became, as queen of England, the head of fashion, looked with harsh
eyes on his defects, and with contempt on the affection her royal
husband entertained for him. My father felt that his fall was near; but
so far from profiting by this last calm before the storm to save
himself, he sought to forget anticipated evil by making still greater
sacrifices to the deity of pleasure, deceitful and cruel arbiter of his
destiny.

The king, who was a man of excellent dispositions, but easily led, had
now become a willing disciple of his imperious consort. He was induced
to look with extreme disapprobation, and at last with distaste, on my
father’s imprudence and follies. It is true that his presence
dissipated these clouds; his warm-hearted frankness, brilliant sallies,
and confiding demeanour were irresistible: it was only when at a
distance, while still renewed tales of his errors were poured into his
royal friend’s ear, that he lost his influence. The queen’s dextrous
management was employed to prolong these absences, and gather together
accusations. At length the king was brought to see in him a source of
perpetual disquiet, knowing that he should pay for the short-lived
pleasure of his society by tedious homilies, and more painful
narrations of excesses, the truth of which he could not disprove. The
result was, that he would make one more attempt to reclaim him, and in
case of ill success, cast him off for ever.

Such a scene must have been one of deepest interest and high-wrought
passion. A powerful king, conspicuous for a goodness which had
heretofore made him meek, and now lofty in his admonitions, with
alternate entreaty and reproof, besought his friend to attend to his
real interests, resolutely to avoid those fascinations which in fact
were fast deserting him, and to spend his great powers on a worthy
field, in which he, his sovereign, would be his prop, his stay, and his
pioneer. My father felt this kindness; for a moment ambitious dreams
floated before him; and he thought that it would be well to exchange
his present pursuits for nobler duties. With sincerity and fervour he
gave the required promise: as a pledge of continued favour, he received
from his royal master a sum of money to defray pressing debts, and
enable him to enter under good auspices his new career. That very
night, while yet full of gratitude and good resolves, this whole sum,
and its amount doubled, was lost at the gaming-table. In his desire to
repair his first losses, my father risked double stakes, and thus
incurred a debt of honour he was wholly unable to pay. Ashamed to apply
again to the king, he turned his back upon London, its false delights
and clinging miseries; and, with poverty for his sole companion, buried
himself in solitude among the hills and lakes of Cumberland. His wit,
his bon mots, the record of his personal attractions, fascinating
manners, and social talents, were long remembered and repeated from
mouth to mouth. Ask where now was this favourite of fashion, this
companion of the noble, this excelling beam, which gilt with alien
splendour the assemblies of the courtly and the gay—you heard that he
was under a cloud, a lost man; not one thought it belonged to him to
repay pleasure by real services, or that his long reign of brilliant
wit deserved a pension on retiring. The king lamented his absence; he
loved to repeat his sayings, relate the adventures they had had
together, and exalt his talents—but here ended his reminiscence.

Meanwhile my father, forgotten, could not forget. He repined for the
loss of what was more necessary to him than air or food—the excitements
of pleasure, the admiration of the noble, the luxurious and polished
living of the great. A nervous fever was the consequence; during which
he was nursed by the daughter of a poor cottager, under whose roof he
lodged. She was lovely, gentle, and, above all, kind to him; nor can it
afford astonishment, that the late idol of high-bred beauty should,
even in a fallen state, appear a being of an elevated and wondrous
nature to the lowly cottage-girl. The attachment between them led to
the ill-fated marriage, of which I was the offspring. Notwithstanding
the tenderness and sweetness of my mother, her husband still deplored
his degraded state. Unaccustomed to industry, he knew not in what way
to contribute to the support of his increasing family. Sometimes he
thought of applying to the king; pride and shame for a while withheld
him; and, before his necessities became so imperious as to compel him
to some kind of exertion, he died. For one brief interval before this
catastrophe, he looked forward to the future, and contemplated with
anguish the desolate situation in which his wife and children would be
left. His last effort was a letter to the king, full of touching
eloquence, and of occasional flashes of that brilliant spirit which was
an integral part of him. He bequeathed his widow and orphans to the
friendship of his royal master, and felt satisfied that, by this means,
their prosperity was better assured in his death than in his life. This
letter was enclosed to the care of a nobleman, who, he did not doubt,
would perform the last and inexpensive office of placing it in the
king’s own hand.

He died in debt, and his little property was seized immediately by his
creditors. My mother, pennyless and burthened with two children, waited
week after week, and month after month, in sickening expectation of a
reply, which never came. She had no experience beyond her father’s
cottage; and the mansion of the lord of the manor was the chiefest type
of grandeur she could conceive. During my father’s life, she had been
made familiar with the name of royalty and the courtly circle; but such
things, ill according with her personal experience, appeared, after the
loss of him who gave substance and reality to them, vague and
fantastical. If, under any circumstances, she could have acquired
sufficient courage to address the noble persons mentioned by her
husband, the ill success of his own application caused her to banish
the idea. She saw therefore no escape from dire penury: perpetual care,
joined to sorrow for the loss of the wondrous being, whom she continued
to contemplate with ardent admiration, hard labour, and naturally
delicate health, at length released her from the sad continuity of want
and misery.

The condition of her orphan children was peculiarly desolate. Her own
father had been an emigrant from another part of the country, and had
died long since: they had no one relation to take them by the hand;
they were outcasts, paupers, unfriended beings, to whom the most scanty
pittance was a matter of favour, and who were treated merely as
children of peasants, yet poorer than the poorest, who, dying, had left
them, a thankless bequest, to the close-handed charity of the land.

I, the elder of the two, was five years old when my mother died. A
remembrance of the discourses of my parents, and the communications
which my mother endeavoured to impress upon me concerning my father’s
friends, in slight hope that I might one day derive benefit from the
knowledge, floated like an indistinct dream through my brain. I
conceived that I was different and superior to my protectors and
companions, but I knew not how or wherefore. The sense of injury,
associated with the name of king and noble, clung to me; but I could
draw no conclusions from such feelings, to serve as a guide to action.
My first real knowledge of myself was as an unprotected orphan among
the valleys and fells of Cumberland. I was in the service of a farmer;
and with crook in hand, my dog at my side, I shepherded a numerous
flock on the near uplands. I cannot say much in praise of such a life;
and its pains far exceeded its pleasures. There was freedom in it, a
companionship with nature, and a reckless loneliness; but these,
romantic as they were, did not accord with the love of action and
desire of human sympathy, characteristic of youth. Neither the care of
my flock, nor the change of seasons, were sufficient to tame my eager
spirit; my out-door life and unemployed time were the temptations that
led me early into lawless habits. I associated with others friendless
like myself; I formed them into a band, I was their chief and captain.
All shepherd-boys alike, while our flocks were spread over the
pastures, we schemed and executed many a mischievous prank, which drew
on us the anger and revenge of the rustics. I was the leader and
protector of my comrades, and as I became distinguished among them,
their misdeeds were usually visited upon me. But while I endured
punishment and pain in their defence with the spirit of an hero, I
claimed as my reward their praise and obedience.

In such a school my disposition became rugged, but firm. The appetite
for admiration and small capacity for self-controul which I inherited
from my father, nursed by adversity, made me daring and reckless. I was
rough as the elements, and unlearned as the animals I tended. I often
compared myself to them, and finding that my chief superiority
consisted in power, I soon persuaded myself that it was in power only
that I was inferior to the chiefest potentates of the earth. Thus
untaught in refined philosophy, and pursued by a restless feeling of
degradation from my true station in society, I wandered among the hills
of civilized England as uncouth a savage as the wolf-bred founder of
old Rome. I owned but one law, it was that of the strongest, and my
greatest deed of virtue was never to submit.

Yet let me a little retract from this sentence I have passed on myself.
My mother, when dying, had, in addition to her other half-forgotten and
misapplied lessons, committed, with solemn exhortation, her other child
to my fraternal guardianship; and this one duty I performed to the best
of my ability, with all the zeal and affection of which my nature was
capable. My sister was three years younger than myself; I had nursed
her as an infant, and when the difference of our sexes, by giving us
various occupations, in a great measure divided us, yet she continued
to be the object of my careful love. Orphans, in the fullest sense of
the term, we were poorest among the poor, and despised among the
unhonoured. If my daring and courage obtained for me a kind of
respectful aversion, her youth and sex, since they did not excite
tenderness, by proving her to be weak, were the causes of numberless
mortifications to her; and her own disposition was not so constituted
as to diminish the evil effects of her lowly station.

She was a singular being, and, like me, inherited much of the peculiar
disposition of our father. Her countenance was all expression; her eyes
were not dark, but impenetrably deep; you seemed to discover space
after space in their intellectual glance, and to feel that the soul
which was their soul, comprehended an universe of thought in its ken.
She was pale and fair, and her golden hair clustered on her temples,
contrasting its rich hue with the living marble beneath. Her coarse
peasant-dress, little consonant apparently with the refinement of
feeling which her face expressed, yet in a strange manner accorded with
it. She was like one of Guido’s saints, with heaven in her heart and in
her look, so that when you saw her you only thought of that within, and
costume and even feature were secondary to the mind that beamed in her
countenance.

Yet though lovely and full of noble feeling, my poor Perdita (for this
was the fanciful name my sister had received from her dying parent),
was not altogether saintly in her disposition. Her manners were cold
and repulsive. If she had been nurtured by those who had regarded her
with affection, she might have been different; but unloved and
neglected, she repaid want of kindness with distrust and silence. She
was submissive to those who held authority over her, but a perpetual
cloud dwelt on her brow; she looked as if she expected enmity from
every one who approached her, and her actions were instigated by the
same feeling. All the time she could command she spent in solitude. She
would ramble to the most unfrequented places, and scale dangerous
heights, that in those unvisited spots she might wrap herself in
loneliness. Often she passed whole hours walking up and down the paths
of the woods; she wove garlands of flowers and ivy, or watched the
flickering of the shadows and glancing of the leaves; sometimes she sat
beside a stream, and as her thoughts paused, threw flowers or pebbles
into the waters, watching how those swam and these sank; or she would
set afloat boats formed of bark of trees or leaves, with a feather for
a sail, and intensely watch the navigation of her craft among the
rapids and shallows of the brook. Meanwhile her active fancy wove a
thousand combinations; she dreamt “of moving accidents by flood and
field”—she lost herself delightedly in these self-created wanderings,
and returned with unwilling spirit to the dull detail of common life.
Poverty was the cloud that veiled her excellencies, and all that was
good in her seemed about to perish from want of the genial dew of
affection. She had not even the same advantage as I in the recollection
of her parents; she clung to me, her brother, as her only friend, but
her alliance with me completed the distaste that her protectors felt
for her; and every error was magnified by them into crimes. If she had
been bred in that sphere of life to which by inheritance the delicate
framework of her mind and person was adapted, she would have been the
object almost of adoration, for her virtues were as eminent as her
defects. All the genius that ennobled the blood of her father
illustrated hers; a generous tide flowed in her veins; artifice, envy,
or meanness, were at the antipodes of her nature; her countenance, when
enlightened by amiable feeling, might have belonged to a queen of
nations; her eyes were bright; her look fearless.

Although by our situation and dispositions we were almost equally cut
off from the usual forms of social intercourse, we formed a strong
contrast to each other. I always required the stimulants of
companionship and applause. Perdita was all-sufficient to herself.
Notwithstanding my lawless habits, my disposition was sociable, hers
recluse. My life was spent among tangible realities, hers was a dream.
I might be said even to love my enemies, since by exciting me they in a
sort bestowed happiness upon me; Perdita almost disliked her friends,
for they interfered with her visionary moods. All my feelings, even of
exultation and triumph, were changed to bitterness, if unparticipated;
Perdita, even in joy, fled to loneliness, and could go on from day to
day, neither expressing her emotions, nor seeking a fellow-feeling in
another mind. Nay, she could love and dwell with tenderness on the look
and voice of her friend, while her demeanour expressed the coldest
reserve. A sensation with her became a sentiment, and she never spoke
until she had mingled her perceptions of outward objects with others
which were the native growth of her own mind. She was like a fruitful
soil that imbibed the airs and dews of heaven, and gave them forth
again to light in loveliest forms of fruits and flowers; but then she
was often dark and rugged as that soil, raked up, and new sown with
unseen seed.

She dwelt in a cottage whose trim grass-plat sloped down to the waters
of the lake of Ulswater; a beech wood stretched up the hill behind, and
a purling brook gently falling from the acclivity ran through
poplar-shaded banks into the lake. I lived with a farmer whose house
was built higher up among the hills: a dark crag rose behind it, and,
exposed to the north, the snow lay in its crevices the summer through.
Before dawn I led my flock to the sheep-walks, and guarded them through
the day. It was a life of toil; for rain and cold were more frequent
than sunshine; but it was my pride to contemn the elements. My trusty
dog watched the sheep as I slipped away to the rendezvous of my
comrades, and thence to the accomplishment of our schemes. At noon we
met again, and we threw away in contempt our peasant fare, as we built
our fire-place and kindled the cheering blaze destined to cook the game
stolen from the neighbouring preserves. Then came the tale of
hair-breadth escapes, combats with dogs, ambush and flight, as
gipsey-like we encompassed our pot. The search after a stray lamb, or
the devices by which we elude or endeavoured to elude punishment,
filled up the hours of afternoon; in the evening my flock went to its
fold, and I to my sister.

It was seldom indeed that we escaped, to use an old-fashioned phrase,
scot free. Our dainty fare was often exchanged for blows and
imprisonment. Once, when thirteen years of age, I was sent for a month
to the county jail. I came out, my morals unimproved, my hatred to my
oppressors encreased tenfold. Bread and water did not tame my blood,
nor solitary confinement inspire me with gentle thoughts. I was angry,
impatient, miserable; my only happy hours were those during which I
devised schemes of revenge; these were perfected in my forced solitude,
so that during the whole of the following season, and I was freed early
in September, I never failed to provide excellent and plenteous fare
for myself and my comrades. This was a glorious winter. The sharp frost
and heavy snows tamed the animals, and kept the country gentlemen by
their firesides; we got more game than we could eat, and my faithful
dog grew sleek upon our refuse.

Thus years passed on; and years only added fresh love of freedom, and
contempt for all that was not as wild and rude as myself. At the age of
sixteen I had shot up in appearance to man’s estate; I was tall and
athletic; I was practised to feats of strength, and inured to the
inclemency of the elements. My skin was embrowned by the sun; my step
was firm with conscious power. I feared no man, and loved none. In
after life I looked back with wonder to what I then was; how utterly
worthless I should have become if I had pursued my lawless career. My
life was like that of an animal, and my mind was in danger of
degenerating into that which informs brute nature. Until now, my savage
habits had done me no radical mischief; my physical powers had grown up
and flourished under their influence, and my mind, undergoing the same
discipline, was imbued with all the hardy virtues. But now my boasted
independence was daily instigating me to acts of tyranny, and freedom
was becoming licentiousness. I stood on the brink of manhood; passions,
strong as the trees of a forest, had already taken root within me, and
were about to shadow with their noxious overgrowth, my path of life.

I panted for enterprises beyond my childish exploits, and formed
distempered dreams of future action. I avoided my ancient comrades, and
I soon lost them. They arrived at the age when they were sent to fulfil
their destined situations in life; while I, an outcast, with none to
lead or drive me forward, paused. The old began to point at me as an
example, the young to wonder at me as a being distinct from themselves;
I hated them, and began, last and worst degradation, to hate myself. I
clung to my ferocious habits, yet half despised them; I continued my
war against civilization, and yet entertained a wish to belong to it.

I revolved again and again all that I remembered my mother to have told
me of my father’s former life; I contemplated the few relics I
possessed belonging to him, which spoke of greater refinement than
could be found among the mountain cottages; but nothing in all this
served as a guide to lead me to another and pleasanter way of life. My
father had been connected with nobles, but all I knew of such
connection was subsequent neglect. The name of the king,—he to whom my
dying father had addressed his latest prayers, and who had barbarously
slighted them, was associated only with the ideas of unkindness,
injustice, and consequent resentment. I was born for something greater
than I was—and greater I would become; but greatness, at least to my
distorted perceptions, was no necessary associate of goodness, and my
wild thoughts were unchecked by moral considerations when they rioted
in dreams of distinction. Thus I stood upon a pinnacle, a sea of evil
rolled at my feet; I was about to precipitate myself into it, and rush
like a torrent over all obstructions to the object of my wishes— when a
stranger influence came over the current of my fortunes, and changed
their boisterous course to what was in comparison like the gentle
meanderings of a meadow-encircling streamlet.




CHAPTER II.


I lived far from the busy haunts of men, and the rumour of wars or
political changes came worn to a mere sound, to our mountain abodes.
England had been the scene of momentous struggles, during my early
boyhood. In the year 2073, the last of its kings, the ancient friend of
my father, had abdicated in compliance with the gentle force of the
remonstrances of his subjects, and a republic was instituted. Large
estates were secured to the dethroned monarch and his family; he
received the title of Earl of Windsor, and Windsor Castle, an ancient
royalty, with its wide demesnes were a part of his allotted wealth. He
died soon after, leaving two children, a son and a daughter.

The ex-queen, a princess of the house of Austria, had long impelled her
husband to withstand the necessity of the times. She was haughty and
fearless; she cherished a love of power, and a bitter contempt for him
who had despoiled himself of a kingdom. For her children’s sake alone
she consented to remain, shorn of regality, a member of the English
republic. When she became a widow, she turned all her thoughts to the
educating her son Adrian, second Earl of Windsor, so as to accomplish
her ambitious ends; and with his mother’s milk he imbibed, and was
intended to grow up in the steady purpose of re-acquiring his lost
crown. Adrian was now fifteen years of age. He was addicted to study,
and imbued beyond his years with learning and talent: report said that
he had already begun to thwart his mother’s views, and to entertain
republican principles. However this might be, the haughty Countess
entrusted none with the secrets of her family-tuition. Adrian was bred
up in solitude, and kept apart from the natural companions of his age
and rank. Some unknown circumstance now induced his mother to send him
from under her immediate tutelage; and we heard that he was about to
visit Cumberland. A thousand tales were rife, explanatory of the
Countess of Windsor’s conduct; none true probably; but each day it
became more certain that we should have the noble scion of the late
regal house of England among us.

There was a large estate with a mansion attached to it, belonging to
this family, at Ulswater. A large park was one of its appendages, laid
out with great taste, and plentifully stocked with game. I had often
made depredations on these preserves; and the neglected state of the
property facilitated my incursions. When it was decided that the young
Earl of Windsor should visit Cumberland, workmen arrived to put the
house and grounds in order for his reception. The apartments were
restored to their pristine splendour, and the park, all disrepairs
restored, was guarded with unusual care.

I was beyond measure disturbed by this intelligence. It roused all my
dormant recollections, my suspended sentiments of injury, and gave rise
to the new one of revenge. I could no longer attend to my occupations;
all my plans and devices were forgotten; I seemed about to begin life
anew, and that under no good auspices. The tug of war, I thought, was
now to begin. He would come triumphantly to the district to which my
parent had fled broken-hearted; he would find the ill-fated offspring,
bequeathed with such vain confidence to his royal father, miserable
paupers. That he should know of our existence, and treat us, near at
hand, with the same contumely which his father had practised in
distance and absence, appeared to me the certain consequence of all
that had gone before. Thus then I should meet this titled stripling—the
son of my father’s friend. He would be hedged in by servants; nobles,
and the sons of nobles, were his companions; all England rang with his
name; and his coming, like a thunderstorm, was heard from far: while I,
unlettered and unfashioned, should, if I came in contact with him, in
the judgment of his courtly followers, bear evidence in my very person
to the propriety of that ingratitude which had made me the degraded
being I appeared.

With my mind fully occupied by these ideas, I might be said as if
fascinated, to haunt the destined abode of the young Earl. I watched
the progress of the improvements, and stood by the unlading waggons, as
various articles of luxury, brought from London, were taken forth and
conveyed into the mansion. It was part of the Ex-Queen’s plan, to
surround her son with princely magnificence. I beheld rich carpets and
silken hangings, ornaments of gold, richly embossed metals, emblazoned
furniture, and all the appendages of high rank arranged, so that
nothing but what was regal in splendour should reach the eye of one of
royal descent. I looked on these; I turned my gaze to my own mean
dress.—Whence sprung this difference? Whence but from ingratitude, from
falsehood, from a dereliction on the part of the prince’s father, of
all noble sympathy and generous feeling. Doubtless, he also, whose
blood received a mingling tide from his proud mother—he, the
acknowledged focus of the kingdom’s wealth and nobility, had been
taught to repeat my father’s name with disdain, and to scoff at my just
claims to protection. I strove to think that all this grandeur was but
more glaring infamy, and that, by planting his gold-enwoven flag beside
my tarnished and tattered banner, he proclaimed not his superiority,
but his debasement. Yet I envied him. His stud of beautiful horses, his
arms of costly workmanship, the praise that attended him, the
adoration, ready servitor, high place and high esteem,—I considered
them as forcibly wrenched from me, and envied them all with novel and
tormenting bitterness.

To crown my vexation of spirit, Perdita, the visionary Perdita, seemed
to awake to real life with transport, when she told me that the Earl of
Windsor was about to arrive.

“And this pleases you?” I observed, moodily.

“Indeed it does, Lionel,” she replied; “I quite long to see him; he is
the descendant of our kings, the first noble of the land: every one
admires and loves him, and they say that his rank is his least merit;
he is generous, brave, and affable.”

“You have learnt a pretty lesson, Perdita,” said I, “and repeat it so
literally, that you forget the while the proofs we have of the Earl’s
virtues; his generosity to us is manifest in our plenty, his bravery in
the protection he affords us, his affability in the notice he takes of
us. His rank his least merit, do you say? Why, all his virtues are
derived from his station only; because he is rich, he is called
generous; because he is powerful, brave; because he is well served, he
is affable. Let them call him so, let all England believe him to be
thus—we know him—he is our enemy—our penurious, dastardly, arrogant
enemy; if he were gifted with one particle of the virtues you call his,
he would do justly by us, if it were only to shew, that if he must
strike, it should not be a fallen foe. His father injured my father—his
father, unassailable on his throne, dared despise him who only stooped
beneath himself, when he deigned to associate with the royal ingrate.
We, descendants from the one and the other, must be enemies also. He
shall find that I can feel my injuries; he shall learn to dread my
revenge!”

A few days after he arrived. Every inhabitant of the most miserable
cottage, went to swell the stream of population that poured forth to
meet him: even Perdita, in spite of my late philippic, crept near the
highway, to behold this idol of all hearts. I, driven half mad, as I
met party after party of the country people, in their holiday best,
descending the hills, escaped to their cloud-veiled summits, and
looking on the sterile rocks about me, exclaimed—“_They_ do not cry,
long live the Earl!” Nor, when night came, accompanied by drizzling
rain and cold, would I return home; for I knew that each cottage rang
with the praises of Adrian; as I felt my limbs grow numb and chill, my
pain served as food for my insane aversion; nay, I almost triumphed in
it, since it seemed to afford me reason and excuse for my hatred of my
unheeding adversary. All was attributed to him, for I confounded so
entirely the idea of father and son, that I forgot that the latter
might be wholly unconscious of his parent’s neglect of us; and as I
struck my aching head with my hand, I cried: “He shall hear of this! I
will be revenged! I will not suffer like a spaniel! He shall know,
beggar and friendless as I am, that I will not tamely submit to
injury!” Each day, each hour added to these exaggerated wrongs. His
praises were so many adder’s stings infixed in my vulnerable breast. If
I saw him at a distance, riding a beautiful horse, my blood boiled with
rage; the air seemed poisoned by his presence, and my very native
English was changed to a vile jargon, since every phrase I heard was
coupled with his name and honour. I panted to relieve this painful
heart-burning by some misdeed that should rouse him to a sense of my
antipathy. It was the height of his offending, that he should occasion
in me such intolerable sensations, and not deign himself to afford any
demonstration that he was aware that I even lived to feel them.

It soon became known that Adrian took great delight in his park and
preserves. He never sported, but spent hours in watching the tribes of
lovely and almost tame animals with which it was stocked, and ordered
that greater care should be taken of them than ever. Here was an
opening for my plans of offence, and I made use of it with all the
brute impetuosity I derived from my active mode of life. I proposed the
enterprize of poaching on his demesne to my few remaining comrades, who
were the most determined and lawless of the crew; but they all shrunk
from the peril; so I was left to achieve my revenge myself. At first my
exploits were unperceived; I increased in daring; footsteps on the dewy
grass, torn boughs, and marks of slaughter, at length betrayed me to
the game-keepers. They kept better watch; I was taken, and sent to
prison. I entered its gloomy walls in a fit of triumphant extasy: “He
feels me now,” I cried, “and shall, again and again!”—I passed but one
day in confinement; in the evening I was liberated, as I was told, by
the order of the Earl himself. This news precipitated me from my
self-raised pinnacle of honour. He despises me, I thought; but he shall
learn that I despise him, and hold in equal contempt his punishments
and his clemency. On the second night after my release, I was again
taken by the gamekeepers—again imprisoned, and again released; and
again, such was my pertinacity, did the fourth night find me in the
forbidden park. The gamekeepers were more enraged than their lord by my
obstinacy. They had received orders that if I were again taken, I
should be brought to the Earl; and his lenity made them expect a
conclusion which they considered ill befitting my crime. One of them,
who had been from the first the leader among those who had seized me,
resolved to satisfy his own resentment, before he made me over to the
higher powers.

The late setting of the moon, and the extreme caution I was obliged to
use in this my third expedition, consumed so much time, that something
like a qualm of fear came over me when I perceived dark night yield to
twilight. I crept along by the fern, on my hands and knees, seeking the
shadowy coverts of the underwood, while the birds awoke with unwelcome
song above, and the fresh morning wind, playing among the boughs, made
me suspect a footfall at each turn. My heart beat quick as I approached
the palings; my hand was on one of them, a leap would take me to the
other side, when two keepers sprang from an ambush upon me: one knocked
me down, and proceeded to inflict a severe horse-whipping. I started
up—a knife was in my grasp; I made a plunge at his raised right arm,
and inflicted a deep, wide wound in his hand. The rage and yells of the
wounded man, the howling execrations of his comrade, which I answered
with equal bitterness and fury, echoed through the dell; morning broke
more and more, ill accordant in its celestial beauty with our brute and
noisy contest. I and my enemy were still struggling, when the wounded
man exclaimed, “The Earl!” I sprang out of the herculean hold of the
keeper, panting from my exertions; I cast furious glances on my
persecutors, and placing myself with my back to a tree, resolved to
defend myself to the last. My garments were torn, and they, as well as
my hands, were stained with the blood of the man I had wounded; one
hand grasped the dead birds—my hard-earned prey, the other held the
knife; my hair was matted; my face besmeared with the same guilty signs
that bore witness against me on the dripping instrument I clenched; my
whole appearance was haggard and squalid. Tall and muscular as I was in
form, I must have looked like, what indeed I was, the merest ruffian
that ever trod the earth.

The name of the Earl startled me, and caused all the indignant blood
that warmed my heart to rush into my cheeks; I had never seen him
before; I figured to myself a haughty, assuming youth, who would take
me to task, if he deigned to speak to me, with all the arrogance of
superiority. My reply was ready; a reproach I deemed calculated to
sting his very heart. He came up the while; and his appearance blew
aside, with gentle western breath, my cloudy wrath: a tall, slim, fair
boy, with a physiognomy expressive of the excess of sensibility and
refinement stood before me; the morning sunbeams tinged with gold his
silken hair, and spread light and glory over his beaming countenance.
“How is this?” he cried. The men eagerly began their defence; he put
them aside, saying, “Two of you at once on a mere lad— for shame!” He
came up to me: “Verney,” he cried, “Lionel Verney, do we meet thus for
the first time? We were born to be friends to each other; and though
ill fortune has divided us, will you not acknowledge the hereditary
bond of friendship which I trust will hereafter unite us?”

As he spoke, his earnest eyes, fixed on me, seemed to read my very
soul: my heart, my savage revengeful heart, felt the influence of sweet
benignity sink upon it; while his thrilling voice, like sweetest
melody, awoke a mute echo within me, stirring to its depths the
life-blood in my frame. I desired to reply, to acknowledge his
goodness, accept his proffered friendship; but words, fitting words,
were not afforded to the rough mountaineer; I would have held out my
hand, but its guilty stain restrained me. Adrian took pity on my
faltering mien: “Come with me,” he said, “I have much to say to you;
come home with me—you know who I am?”

“Yes,” I exclaimed, “I do believe that I now know you, and that you
will pardon my mistakes—my crime.”

Adrian smiled gently; and after giving his orders to the gamekeepers,
he came up to me; putting his arm in mine, we walked together to the
mansion.

It was not his rank—after all that I have said, surely it will not be
suspected that it was Adrian’s rank, that, from the first, subdued my
heart of hearts, and laid my entire spirit prostrate before him. Nor
was it I alone who felt thus intimately his perfections. His
sensibility and courtesy fascinated every one. His vivacity,
intelligence, and active spirit of benevolence, completed the conquest.
Even at this early age, he was deep read and imbued with the spirit of
high philosophy. This spirit gave a tone of irresistible persuasion to
his intercourse with others, so that he seemed like an inspired
musician, who struck, with unerring skill, the “lyre of mind,” and
produced thence divine harmony. In person, he hardly appeared of this
world; his slight frame was overinformed by the soul that dwelt within;
he was all mind; “Man but a rush against” his breast, and it would have
conquered his strength; but the might of his smile would have tamed an
hungry lion, or caused a legion of armed men to lay their weapons at
his feet.

I spent the day with him. At first he did not recur to the past, or
indeed to any personal occurrences. He wished probably to inspire me
with confidence, and give me time to gather together my scattered
thoughts. He talked of general subjects, and gave me ideas I had never
before conceived. We sat in his library, and he spoke of the old Greek
sages, and of the power which they had acquired over the minds of men,
through the force of love and wisdom only. The room was decorated with
the busts of many of them, and he described their characters to me. As
he spoke, I felt subject to him; and all my boasted pride and strength
were subdued by the honeyed accents of this blue-eyed boy. The trim and
paled demesne of civilization, which I had before regarded from my wild
jungle as inaccessible, had its wicket opened by him; I stepped within,
and felt, as I entered, that I trod my native soil.

As evening came on, he reverted to the past. “I have a tale to relate,”
he said, “and much explanation to give concerning the past; perhaps you
can assist me to curtail it. Do you remember your father? I had never
the happiness of seeing him, but his name is one of my earliest
recollections: he stands written in my mind’s tablets as the type of
all that was gallant, amiable, and fascinating in man. His wit was not
more conspicuous than the overflowing goodness of his heart, which he
poured in such full measure on his friends, as to leave, alas! small
remnant for himself.”

Encouraged by this encomium, I proceeded, in answer to his inquiries,
to relate what I remembered of my parent; and he gave an account of
those circumstances which had brought about a neglect of my father’s
testamentary letter. When, in after times, Adrian’s father, then king
of England, felt his situation become more perilous, his line of
conduct more embarrassed, again and again he wished for his early
friend, who might stand a mound against the impetuous anger of his
queen, a mediator between him and the parliament. From the time that he
had quitted London, on the fatal night of his defeat at the
gaming-table, the king had received no tidings concerning him; and
when, after the lapse of years, he exerted himself to discover him,
every trace was lost. With fonder regret than ever, he clung to his
memory; and gave it in charge to his son, if ever he should meet this
valued friend, in his name to bestow every succour, and to assure him
that, to the last, his attachment survived separation and silence.

A short time before Adrian’s visit to Cumberland, the heir of the
nobleman to whom my father had confided his last appeal to his royal
master, put this letter, its seal unbroken, into the young Earl’s
hands. It had been found cast aside with a mass of papers of old date,
and accident alone brought it to light. Adrian read it with deep
interest; and found there that living spirit of genius and wit he had
so often heard commemorated. He discovered the name of the spot whither
my father had retreated, and where he died; he learnt the existence of
his orphan children; and during the short interval between his arrival
at Ulswater and our meeting in the park, he had been occupied in making
inquiries concerning us, and arranging a variety of plans for our
benefit, preliminary to his introducing himself to our notice.

The mode in which he spoke of my father was gratifying to my vanity;
the veil which he delicately cast over his benevolence, in alledging a
duteous fulfilment of the king’s latest will, was soothing to my pride.
Other feelings, less ambiguous, were called into play by his
conciliating manner and the generous warmth of his expressions, respect
rarely before experienced, admiration, and love—he had touched my rocky
heart with his magic power, and the stream of affection gushed forth,
imperishable and pure. In the evening we parted; he pressed my hand:
“We shall meet again; come to me to-morrow.” I clasped that kind hand;
I tried to answer; a fervent “God bless you!” was all my ignorance
could frame of speech, and I darted away, oppressed by my new emotions.

I could not rest. I sought the hills; a west wind swept them, and the
stars glittered above. I ran on, careless of outward objects, but
trying to master the struggling spirit within me by means of bodily
fatigue. “This,” I thought, “is power! Not to be strong of limb, hard
of heart, ferocious, and daring; but kind, compassionate and
soft.”—Stopping short, I clasped my hands, and with the fervour of a
new proselyte, cried, “Doubt me not, Adrian, I also will become wise
and good!” and then quite overcome, I wept aloud.

As this gust of passion passed from me, I felt more composed. I lay on
the ground, and giving the reins to my thoughts, repassed in my mind my
former life; and began, fold by fold, to unwind the many errors of my
heart, and to discover how brutish, savage, and worthless I had
hitherto been. I could not however at that time feel remorse, for
methought I was born anew; my soul threw off the burthen of past sin,
to commence a new career in innocence and love. Nothing harsh or rough
remained to jar with the soft feelings which the transactions of the
day had inspired; I was as a child lisping its devotions after its
mother, and my plastic soul was remoulded by a master hand, which I
neither desired nor was able to resist.

This was the first commencement of my friendship with Adrian, and I
must commemorate this day as the most fortunate of my life. I now began
to be human. I was admitted within that sacred boundary which divides
the intellectual and moral nature of man from that which characterizes
animals. My best feelings were called into play to give fitting
responses to the generosity, wisdom, and amenity of my new friend. He,
with a noble goodness all his own, took infinite delight in bestowing
to prodigality the treasures of his mind and fortune on the
long-neglected son of his father’s friend, the offspring of that gifted
being whose excellencies and talents he had heard commemorated from
infancy.

After his abdication the late king had retreated from the sphere of
politics, yet his domestic circle afforded him small content. The
ex-queen had none of the virtues of domestic life, and those of courage
and daring which she possessed were rendered null by the secession of
her husband: she despised him, and did not care to conceal her
sentiments. The king had, in compliance with her exactions, cast off
his old friends, but he had acquired no new ones under her guidance. In
this dearth of sympathy, he had recourse to his almost infant son; and
the early development of talent and sensibility rendered Adrian no
unfitting depository of his father’s confidence. He was never weary of
listening to the latter’s often repeated accounts of old times, in
which my father had played a distinguished part; his keen remarks were
repeated to the boy, and remembered by him; his wit, his fascinations,
his very faults were hallowed by the regret of affection; his loss was
sincerely deplored. Even the queen’s dislike of the favourite was
ineffectual to deprive him of his son’s admiration: it was bitter,
sarcastic, contemptuous—but as she bestowed her heavy censure alike on
his virtues as his errors, on his devoted friendship and his
ill-bestowed loves, on his disinterestedness and his prodigality, on
his pre-possessing grace of manner, and the facility with which he
yielded to temptation, her double shot proved too heavy, and fell short
of the mark. Nor did her angry dislike prevent Adrian from imaging my
father, as he had said, the type of all that was gallant, amiable, and
fascinating in man. It was not strange therefore, that when he heard of
the existence of the offspring of this celebrated person, he should
have formed the plan of bestowing on them all the advantages his rank
made him rich to afford. When he found me a vagabond shepherd of the
hills, a poacher, an unlettered savage, still his kindness did not
fail. In addition to the opinion he entertained that his father was to
a degree culpable of neglect towards us, and that he was bound to every
possible reparation, he was pleased to say that under all my ruggedness
there glimmered forth an elevation of spirit, which could be
distinguished from mere animal courage, and that I inherited a
similarity of countenance to my father, which gave proof that all his
virtues and talents had not died with him. Whatever those might be
which descended to me, my noble young friend resolved should not be
lost for want of culture.

Acting upon this plan in our subsequent intercourse, he led me to wish
to participate in that cultivation which graced his own intellect. My
active mind, when once it seized upon this new idea, fastened on it
with extreme avidity. At first it was the great object of my ambition
to rival the merits of my father, and render myself worthy of the
friendship of Adrian. But curiosity soon awoke, and an earnest love of
knowledge, which caused me to pass days and nights in reading and
study. I was already well acquainted with what I may term the panorama
of nature, the change of seasons, and the various appearances of heaven
and earth. But I was at once startled and enchanted by my sudden
extension of vision, when the curtain, which had been drawn before the
intellectual world, was withdrawn, and I saw the universe, not only as
it presented itself to my outward senses, but as it had appeared to the
wisest among men. Poetry and its creations, philosophy and its
researches and classifications, alike awoke the sleeping ideas in my
mind, and gave me new ones.

I felt as the sailor, who from the topmast first discovered the shore
of America; and like him I hastened to tell my companions of my
discoveries in unknown regions. But I was unable to excite in any
breast the same craving appetite for knowledge that existed in mine.
Even Perdita was unable to understand me. I had lived in what is
generally called the world of reality, and it was awakening to a new
country to find that there was a deeper meaning in all I saw, besides
that which my eyes conveyed to me. The visionary Perdita beheld in all
this only a new gloss upon an old reading, and her own was sufficiently
inexhaustible to content her. She listened to me as she had done to the
narration of my adventures, and sometimes took an interest in this
species of information; but she did not, as I did, look on it as an
integral part of her being, which having obtained, I could no more put
off than the universal sense of touch.

We both agreed in loving Adrian: although she not having yet escaped
from childhood could not appreciate as I did the extent of his merits,
or feel the same sympathy in his pursuits and opinions. I was for ever
with him. There was a sensibility and sweetness in his disposition,
that gave a tender and unearthly tone to our converse. Then he was gay
as a lark carolling from its skiey tower, soaring in thought as an
eagle, innocent as the mild-eyed dove. He could dispel the seriousness
of Perdita, and take the sting from the torturing activity of my
nature. I looked back to my restless desires and painful struggles with
my fellow beings as to a troubled dream, and felt myself as much
changed as if I had transmigrated into another form, whose fresh
sensorium and mechanism of nerves had altered the reflection of the
apparent universe in the mirror of mind. But it was not so; I was the
same in strength, in earnest craving for sympathy, in my yearning for
active exertion. My manly virtues did not desert me, for the witch
Urania spared the locks of Sampson, while he reposed at her feet; but
all was softened and humanized. Nor did Adrian instruct me only in the
cold truths of history and philosophy. At the same time that he taught
me by their means to subdue my own reckless and uncultured spirit, he
opened to my view the living page of his own heart, and gave me to feel
and understand its wondrous character.

The ex-queen of England had, even during infancy, endeavoured to
implant daring and ambitious designs in the mind of her son. She saw
that he was endowed with genius and surpassing talent; these she
cultivated for the sake of afterwards using them for the furtherance of
her own views. She encouraged his craving for knowledge and his
impetuous courage; she even tolerated his tameless love of freedom,
under the hope that this would, as is too often the case, lead to a
passion for command. She endeavoured to bring him up in a sense of
resentment towards, and a desire to revenge himself upon, those who had
been instrumental in bringing about his father’s abdication. In this
she did not succeed. The accounts furnished him, however distorted, of
a great and wise nation asserting its right to govern itself, excited
his admiration: in early days he became a republican from principle.
Still his mother did not despair. To the love of rule and haughty pride
of birth she added determined ambition, patience, and self-control. She
devoted herself to the study of her son’s disposition. By the
application of praise, censure, and exhortation, she tried to seek and
strike the fitting chords; and though the melody that followed her
touch seemed discord to her, she built her hopes on his talents, and
felt sure that she would at last win him. The kind of banishment he now
experienced arose from other causes.

The ex-queen had also a daughter, now twelve years of age; his fairy
sister, Adrian was wont to call her; a lovely, animated, little thing,
all sensibility and truth. With these, her children, the noble widow
constantly resided at Windsor; and admitted no visitors, except her own
partizans, travellers from her native Germany, and a few of the foreign
ministers. Among these, and highly distinguished by her, was Prince
Zaimi, ambassador to England from the free States of Greece; and his
daughter, the young Princess Evadne, passed much of her time at Windsor
Castle. In company with this sprightly and clever Greek girl, the
Countess would relax from her usual state. Her views with regard to her
own children, placed all her words and actions relative to _them_ under
restraint: but Evadne was a plaything she could in no way fear; nor
were her talents and vivacity slight alleviations to the monotony of
the Countess’s life.

Evadne was eighteen years of age. Although they spent much time
together at Windsor, the extreme youth of Adrian prevented any
suspicion as to the nature of their intercourse. But he was ardent and
tender of heart beyond the common nature of man, and had already learnt
to love, while the beauteous Greek smiled benignantly on the boy. It
was strange to me, who, though older than Adrian, had never loved, to
witness the whole heart’s sacrifice of my friend. There was neither
jealousy, inquietude, or mistrust in his sentiment; it was devotion and
faith. His life was swallowed up in the existence of his beloved; and
his heart beat only in unison with the pulsations that vivified hers.
This was the secret law of his life—he loved and was beloved. The
universe was to him a dwelling, to inhabit with his chosen one; and not
either a scheme of society or an enchainment of events, that could
impart to him either happiness or misery. What, though life and the
system of social intercourse were a wilderness, a tiger-haunted jungle!
Through the midst of its errors, in the depths of its savage recesses,
there was a disentangled and flowery pathway, through which they might
journey in safety and delight. Their track would be like the passage of
the Red Sea, which they might traverse with unwet feet, though a wall
of destruction were impending on either side.

Alas! why must I record the hapless delusion of this matchless specimen
of humanity? What is there in our nature that is for ever urging us on
towards pain and misery? We are not formed for enjoyment; and, however
we may be attuned to the reception of pleasureable emotion,
disappointment is the never-failing pilot of our life’s bark, and
ruthlessly carries us on to the shoals. Who was better framed than this
highly-gifted youth to love and be beloved, and to reap unalienable joy
from an unblamed passion? If his heart had slept but a few years
longer, he might have been saved; but it awoke in its infancy; it had
power, but no knowledge; and it was ruined, even as a too early-blowing
bud is nipt by the killing frost.

I did not accuse Evadne of hypocrisy or a wish to deceive her lover;
but the first letter that I saw of hers convinced me that she did not
love him; it was written with elegance, and, foreigner as she was, with
great command of language. The hand-writing itself was exquisitely
beautiful; there was something in her very paper and its folds, which
even I, who did not love, and was withal unskilled in such matters,
could discern as being tasteful. There was much kindness, gratitude,
and sweetness in her expression, but no love. Evadne was two years
older than Adrian; and who, at eighteen, ever loved one so much their
junior? I compared her placid epistles with the burning ones of Adrian.
His soul seemed to distil itself into the words he wrote; and they
breathed on the paper, bearing with them a portion of the life of love,
which was his life. The very writing used to exhaust him; and he would
weep over them, merely from the excess of emotion they awakened in his
heart.

Adrian’s soul was painted in his countenance, and concealment or deceit
were at the antipodes to the dreadless frankness of his nature. Evadne
made it her earnest request that the tale of their loves should not be
revealed to his mother; and after for a while contesting the point, he
yielded it to her. A vain concession; his demeanour quickly betrayed
his secret to the quick eyes of the ex-queen. With the same wary
prudence that characterized her whole conduct, she concealed her
discovery, but hastened to remove her son from the sphere of the
attractive Greek. He was sent to Cumberland; but the plan of
correspondence between the lovers, arranged by Evadne, was effectually
hidden from her. Thus the absence of Adrian, concerted for the purpose
of separating, united them in firmer bonds than ever. To me he
discoursed ceaselessly of his beloved Ionian. Her country, its ancient
annals, its late memorable struggles, were all made to partake in her
glory and excellence. He submitted to be away from her, because she
commanded this submission; but for her influence, he would have
declared his attachment before all England, and resisted, with unshaken
constancy, his mother’s opposition. Evadne’s feminine prudence
perceived how useless any assertion of his resolves would be, till
added years gave weight to his power. Perhaps there was besides a
lurking dislike to bind herself in the face of the world to one whom
she did not love—not love, at least, with that passionate enthusiasm
which her heart told her she might one day feel towards another. He
obeyed her injunctions, and passed a year in exile in Cumberland.




CHAPTER III.


Happy, thrice happy, were the months, and weeks, and hours of that
year. Friendship, hand in hand with admiration, tenderness and respect,
built a bower of delight in my heart, late rough as an untrod wild in
America, as the homeless wind or herbless sea. Insatiate thirst for
knowledge, and boundless affection for Adrian, combined to keep both my
heart and understanding occupied, and I was consequently happy. What
happiness is so true and unclouded, as the overflowing and talkative
delight of young people. In our boat, upon my native lake, beside the
streams and the pale bordering poplars—in valley and over hill, my
crook thrown aside, a nobler flock to tend than silly sheep, even a
flock of new-born ideas, I read or listened to Adrian; and his
discourse, whether it concerned his love or his theories for the
improvement of man, alike entranced me. Sometimes my lawless mood would
return, my love of peril, my resistance to authority; but this was in
his absence; under the mild sway of his dear eyes, I was obedient and
good as a boy of five years old, who does his mother’s bidding.

After a residence of about a year at Ulswater, Adrian visited London,
and came back full of plans for our benefit. You must begin life, he
said: you are seventeen, and longer delay would render the necessary
apprenticeship more and more irksome. He foresaw that his own life
would be one of struggle, and I must partake his labours with him. The
better to fit me for this task, we must now separate. He found my name
a good passport to preferment, and he had procured for me the situation
of private secretary to the Ambassador at Vienna, where I should enter
on my career under the best auspices. In two years, I should return to
my country, with a name well known and a reputation already founded.

And Perdita?—Perdita was to become the pupil, friend and younger sister
of Evadne. With his usual thoughtfulness, he had provided for her
independence in this situation. How refuse the offers of this generous
friend?—I did not wish to refuse them; but in my heart of hearts, I
made a vow to devote life, knowledge, and power, all of which, in as
much as they were of any value, he had bestowed on me—all, all my
capacities and hopes, to him alone I would devote.

Thus I promised myself, as I journied towards my destination with
roused and ardent expectation: expectation of the fulfilment of all
that in boyhood we promise ourselves of power and enjoyment in
maturity. Methought the time was now arrived, when, childish
occupations laid aside, I should enter into life. Even in the Elysian
fields, Virgil describes the souls of the happy as eager to drink of
the wave which was to restore them to this mortal coil. The young are
seldom in Elysium, for their desires, outstripping possibility, leave
them as poor as a moneyless debtor. We are told by the wisest
philosophers of the dangers of the world, the deceits of men, and the
treason of our own hearts: but not the less fearlessly does each put
off his frail bark from the port, spread the sail, and strain his oar,
to attain the multitudinous streams of the sea of life. How few in
youth’s prime, moor their vessels on the “golden sands,” and collect
the painted shells that strew them. But all at close of day, with riven
planks and rent canvas make for shore, and are either wrecked ere they
reach it, or find some wave-beaten haven, some desart strand, whereon
to cast themselves and die unmourned.

A truce to philosophy!—Life is before me, and I rush into possession.
Hope, glory, love, and blameless ambition are my guides, and my soul
knows no dread. What has been, though sweet, is gone; the present is
good only because it is about to change, and the to come is all my own.
Do I fear, that my heart palpitates? high aspirations cause the flow of
my blood; my eyes seem to penetrate the cloudy midnight of time, and to
discern within the depths of its darkness, the fruition of all my soul
desires.

Now pause!—During my journey I might dream, and with buoyant wings
reach the summit of life’s high edifice. Now that I am arrived at its
base, my pinions are furled, the mighty stairs are before me, and step
by step I must ascend the wondrous fane—

Speak!—What door is opened?


Behold me in a new capacity. A diplomatist: one among the
pleasure-seeking society of a gay city; a youth of promise; favourite
of the Ambassador. All was strange and admirable to the shepherd of
Cumberland. With breathless amaze I entered on the gay scene, whose
actors were

—the lilies glorious as Solomon,
Who toil not, neither do they spin.


Soon, too soon, I entered the giddy whirl; forgetting my studious
hours, and the companionship of Adrian. Passionate desire of sympathy,
and ardent pursuit for a wished-for object still characterized me. The
sight of beauty entranced me, and attractive manners in man or woman
won my entire confidence. I called it rapture, when a smile made my
heart beat; and I felt the life’s blood tingle in my frame, when I
approached the idol which for awhile I worshipped. The mere flow of
animal spirits was Paradise, and at night’s close I only desired a
renewal of the intoxicating delusion. The dazzling light of ornamented
rooms; lovely forms arrayed in splendid dresses; the motions of a
dance, the voluptuous tones of exquisite music, cradled my senses in
one delightful dream.

And is not this in its kind happiness? I appeal to moralists and sages.
I ask if in the calm of their measured reveries, if in the deep
meditations which fill their hours, they feel the extasy of a youthful
tyro in the school of pleasure? Can the calm beams of their
heaven-seeking eyes equal the flashes of mingling passion which blind
his, or does the influence of cold philosophy steep their soul in a joy
equal to his, engaged

In this dear work of youthful revelry.


But in truth, neither the lonely meditations of the hermit, nor the
tumultuous raptures of the reveller, are capable of satisfying man’s
heart. From the one we gather unquiet speculation, from the other
satiety. The mind flags beneath the weight of thought, and droops in
the heartless intercourse of those whose sole aim is amusement. There
is no fruition in their vacant kindness, and sharp rocks lurk beneath
the smiling ripples of these shallow waters.

Thus I felt, when disappointment, weariness, and solitude drove me back
upon my heart, to gather thence the joy of which it had become barren.
My flagging spirits asked for something to speak to the affections; and
not finding it, I drooped. Thus, notwithstanding the thoughtless
delight that waited on its commencement, the impression I have of my
life at Vienna is melancholy. Goethe has said, that in youth we cannot
be happy unless we love. I did not love; but I was devoured by a
restless wish to be something to others. I became the victim of
ingratitude and cold coquetry—then I desponded, and imagined that my
discontent gave me a right to hate the world. I receded to solitude; I
had recourse to my books, and my desire again to enjoy the society of
Adrian became a burning thirst.

Emulation, that in its excess almost assumed the venomous properties of
envy, gave a sting to these feelings. At this period the name and
exploits of one of my countrymen filled the world with admiration.
Relations of what he had done, conjectures concerning his future
actions, were the never-failing topics of the hour. I was not angry on
my own account, but I felt as if the praises which this idol received
were leaves torn from laurels destined for Adrian. But I must enter
into some account of this darling of fame—this favourite of the
wonder-loving world.

Lord Raymond was the sole remnant of a noble but impoverished family.
From early youth he had considered his pedigree with complacency, and
bitterly lamented his want of wealth. His first wish was
aggrandisement; and the means that led towards this end were secondary
considerations. Haughty, yet trembling to every demonstration of
respect; ambitious, but too proud to shew his ambition; willing to
achieve honour, yet a votary of pleasure,— he entered upon life. He was
met on the threshold by some insult, real or imaginary; some repulse,
where he least expected it; some disappointment, hard for his pride to
bear. He writhed beneath an injury he was unable to revenge; and he
quitted England with a vow not to return, till the good time should
arrive, when she might feel the power of him she now despised.

He became an adventurer in the Greek wars. His reckless courage and
comprehensive genius brought him into notice. He became the darling
hero of this rising people. His foreign birth, and he refused to throw
off his allegiance to his native country, alone prevented him from
filling the first offices in the state. But, though others might rank
higher in title and ceremony, Lord Raymond held a station above and
beyond all this. He led the Greek armies to victory; their triumphs
were all his own. When he appeared, whole towns poured forth their
population to meet him; new songs were adapted to their national airs,
whose themes were his glory, valour, and munificence. A truce was
concluded between the Greeks and Turks. At the same time, Lord Raymond,
by some unlooked-for chance, became the possessor of an immense fortune
in England, whither he returned, crowned with glory, to receive the
meed of honour and distinction before denied to his pretensions. His
proud heart rebelled against this change. In what was the despised
Raymond not the same? If the acquisition of power in the shape of
wealth caused this alteration, that power should they feel as an iron
yoke. Power therefore was the aim of all his endeavours; aggrandizement
the mark at which he for ever shot. In open ambition or close intrigue,
his end was the same—to attain the first station in his own country.

This account filled me with curiosity. The events that in succession
followed his return to England, gave me keener feelings. Among his
other advantages, Lord Raymond was supremely handsome; every one
admired him; of women he was the idol. He was courteous,
honey-tongued—an adept in fascinating arts. What could not this man
achieve in the busy English world? Change succeeded to change; the
entire history did not reach me; for Adrian had ceased to write, and
Perdita was a laconic correspondent. The rumour went that Adrian had
become—how write the fatal word—mad: that Lord Raymond was the
favourite of the ex-queen, her daughter’s destined husband. Nay, more,
that this aspiring noble revived the claim of the house of Windsor to
the crown, and that, on the event of Adrian’s incurable disorder and
his marriage with the sister, the brow of the ambitious Raymond might
be encircled with the magic ring of regality.

Such a tale filled the trumpet of many voiced fame; such a tale
rendered my longer stay at Vienna, away from the friend of my youth,
intolerable. Now I must fulfil my vow; now range myself at his side,
and be his ally and support till death. Farewell to courtly pleasure;
to politic intrigue; to the maze of passion and folly! All hail,
England! Native England, receive thy child! thou art the scene of all
my hopes, the mighty theatre on which is acted the only drama that can,
heart and soul, bear me along with it in its development. A voice most
irresistible, a power omnipotent, drew me thither. After an absence of
two years I landed on its shores, not daring to make any inquiries,
fearful of every remark. My first visit would be to my sister, who
inhabited a little cottage, a part of Adrian’s gift, on the borders of
Windsor Forest. From her I should learn the truth concerning our
protector; I should hear why she had withdrawn from the protection of
the Princess Evadne, and be instructed as to the influence which this
overtopping and towering Raymond exercised over the fortunes of my
friend.

I had never before been in the neighbourhood of Windsor; the fertility
and beauty of the country around now struck me with admiration, which
encreased as I approached the antique wood. The ruins of majestic oaks
which had grown, flourished, and decayed during the progress of
centuries, marked where the limits of the forest once reached, while
the shattered palings and neglected underwood shewed that this part was
deserted for the younger plantations, which owed their birth to the
beginning of the nineteenth century, and now stood in the pride of
maturity. Perdita’s humble dwelling was situated on the skirts of the
most ancient portion; before it was stretched Bishopgate Heath, which
towards the east appeared interminable, and was bounded to the west by
Chapel Wood and the grove of Virginia Water. Behind, the cottage was
shadowed by the venerable fathers of the forest, under which the deer
came to graze, and which for the most part hollow and decayed, formed
fantastic groups that contrasted with the regular beauty of the younger
trees. These, the offspring of a later period, stood erect and seemed
ready to advance fearlessly into coming time; while those out worn
stragglers, blasted and broke, clung to each other, their weak boughs
sighing as the wind buffetted them—a weather-beaten crew.

A light railing surrounded the garden of the cottage, which,
low-roofed, seemed to submit to the majesty of nature, and cower amidst
the venerable remains of forgotten time. Flowers, the children of the
spring, adorned her garden and casements; in the midst of lowliness
there was an air of elegance which spoke the graceful taste of the
inmate. With a beating heart I entered the enclosure; as I stood at the
entrance, I heard her voice, melodious as it had ever been, which
before I saw her assured me of her welfare.

A moment more and Perdita appeared; she stood before me in the fresh
bloom of youthful womanhood, different from and yet the same as the
mountain girl I had left. Her eyes could not be deeper than they were
in childhood, nor her countenance more expressive; but the expression
was changed and improved; intelligence sat on her brow; when she smiled
her face was embellished by the softest sensibility, and her low,
modulated voice seemed tuned by love. Her person was formed in the most
feminine proportions; she was not tall, but her mountain life had given
freedom to her motions, so that her light step scarce made her
foot-fall heard as she tript across the hall to meet me. When we had
parted, I had clasped her to my bosom with unrestrained warmth; we met
again, and new feelings were awakened; when each beheld the other,
childhood passed, as full grown actors on this changeful scene. The
pause was but for a moment; the flood of association and natural
feeling which had been checked, again rushed in full tide upon our
hearts, and with tenderest emotion we were swiftly locked in each
other’s embrace.

This burst of passionate feeling over, with calmed thoughts we sat
together, talking of the past and present. I alluded to the coldness of
her letters; but the few minutes we had spent together sufficiently
explained the origin of this. New feelings had arisen within her, which
she was unable to express in writing to one whom she had only known in
childhood; but we saw each other again, and our intimacy was renewed as
if nothing had intervened to check it. I detailed the incidents of my
sojourn abroad, and then questioned her as to the changes that had
taken place at home, the causes of Adrian’s absence, and her secluded
life.

The tears that suffused my sister’s eyes when I mentioned our friend,
and her heightened colour seemed to vouch for the truth of the reports
that had reached me. But their import was too terrible for me to give
instant credit to my suspicion. Was there indeed anarchy in the sublime
universe of Adrian’s thoughts, did madness scatter the well-appointed
legions, and was he no longer the lord of his own soul? Beloved friend,
this ill world was no clime for your gentle spirit; you delivered up
its governance to false humanity, which stript it of its leaves ere
winter-time, and laid bare its quivering life to the evil ministration
of roughest winds. Have those gentle eyes, those “channels of the soul”
lost their meaning, or do they only in their glare disclose the
horrible tale of its aberrations? Does that voice no longer “discourse
excellent music?” Horrible, most horrible! I veil my eyes in terror of
the change, and gushing tears bear witness to my sympathy for this
unimaginable ruin.

In obedience to my request Perdita detailed the melancholy
circumstances that led to this event.

The frank and unsuspicious mind of Adrian, gifted as it was by every
natural grace, endowed with transcendant powers of intellect,
unblemished by the shadow of defect (unless his dreadless independence
of thought was to be construed into one), was devoted, even as a victim
to sacrifice, to his love for Evadne. He entrusted to her keeping the
treasures of his soul, his aspirations after excellence, and his plans
for the improvement of mankind. As manhood dawned upon him, his schemes
and theories, far from being changed by personal and prudential
motives, acquired new strength from the powers he felt arise within
him; and his love for Evadne became deep-rooted, as he each day became
more certain that the path he pursued was full of difficulty, and that
he must seek his reward, not in the applause or gratitude of his fellow
creatures, hardly in the success of his plans, but in the approbation
of his own heart, and in her love and sympathy, which was to lighten
every toil and recompence every sacrifice.

In solitude, and through many wanderings afar from the haunts of men,
he matured his views for the reform of the English government, and the
improvement of the people. It would have been well if he had concealed
his sentiments, until he had come into possession of the power which
would secure their practical development. But he was impatient of the
years that must intervene, he was frank of heart and fearless. He gave
not only a brief denial to his mother’s schemes, but published his
intention of using his influence to diminish the power of the
aristocracy, to effect a greater equalization of wealth and privilege,
and to introduce a perfect system of republican government into
England. At first his mother treated his theories as the wild ravings
of inexperience. But they were so systematically arranged, and his
arguments so well supported, that though still in appearance
incredulous, she began to fear him. She tried to reason with him, and
finding him inflexible, learned to hate him.

Strange to say, this feeling was infectious. His enthusiasm for good
which did not exist; his contempt for the sacredness of authority; his
ardour and imprudence were all at the antipodes of the usual routine of
life; the worldly feared him; the young and inexperienced did not
understand the lofty severity of his moral views, and disliked him as a
being different from themselves. Evadne entered but coldly into his
systems. She thought he did well to assert his own will, but she wished
that will to have been more intelligible to the multitude. She had none
of the spirit of a martyr, and did not incline to share the shame and
defeat of a fallen patriot. She was aware of the purity of his motives,
the generosity of his disposition, his true and ardent attachment to
her; and she entertained a great affection for him. He repaid this
spirit of kindness with the fondest gratitude, and made her the
treasure-house of all his hopes.

At this time Lord Raymond returned from Greece. No two persons could be
more opposite than Adrian and he. With all the incongruities of his
character, Raymond was emphatically a man of the world. His passions
were violent; as these often obtained the mastery over him, he could
not always square his conduct to the obvious line of self-interest, but
self-gratification at least was the paramount object with him. He
looked on the structure of society as but a part of the machinery which
supported the web on which his life was traced. The earth was spread
out as an highway for him; the heavens built up as a canopy for him.

Adrian felt that he made a part of a great whole. He owned affinity not
only with mankind, but all nature was akin to him; the mountains and
sky were his friends; the winds of heaven and the offspring of earth
his playmates; while he the focus only of this mighty mirror, felt his
life mingle with the universe of existence. His soul was sympathy, and
dedicated to the worship of beauty and excellence. Adrian and Raymond
now came into contact, and a spirit of aversion rose between them.
Adrian despised the narrow views of the politician, and Raymond held in
supreme contempt the benevolent visions of the philanthropist.

With the coming of Raymond was formed the storm that laid waste at one
fell blow the gardens of delight and sheltered paths which Adrian
fancied that he had secured to himself, as a refuge from defeat and
contumely. Raymond, the deliverer of Greece, the graceful soldier, who
bore in his mien a tinge of all that, peculiar to her native clime,
Evadne cherished as most dear— Raymond was loved by Evadne. Overpowered
by her new sensations, she did not pause to examine them, or to
regulate her conduct by any sentiments except the tyrannical one which
suddenly usurped the empire of her heart. She yielded to its influence,
and the too natural consequence in a mind unattuned to soft emotions
was, that the attentions of Adrian became distasteful to her. She grew
capricious; her gentle conduct towards him was exchanged for asperity
and repulsive coldness. When she perceived the wild or pathetic appeal
of his expressive countenance, she would relent, and for a while resume
her ancient kindness. But these fluctuations shook to its depths the
soul of the sensitive youth; he no longer deemed the world subject to
him, because he possessed Evadne’s love; he felt in every nerve that
the dire storms of the mental universe were about to attack his fragile
being, which quivered at the expectation of its advent.

Perdita, who then resided with Evadne, saw the torture that Adrian
endured. She loved him as a kind elder brother; a relation to guide,
protect, and instruct her, without the too frequent tyranny of parental
authority. She adored his virtues, and with mixed contempt and
indignation she saw Evadne pile drear sorrow on his head, for the sake
of one who hardly marked her. In his solitary despair Adrian would
often seek my sister, and in covered terms express his misery, while
fortitude and agony divided the throne of his mind. Soon, alas! was one
to conquer. Anger made no part of his emotion. With whom should he be
angry? Not with Raymond, who was unconscious of the misery he
occasioned; not with Evadne, for her his soul wept tears of blood—poor,
mistaken girl, slave not tyrant was she, and amidst his own anguish he
grieved for her future destiny. Once a writing of his fell into
Perdita’s hands; it was blotted with tears—well might any blot it with
the like—

“Life”—it began thus—“is not the thing romance writers describe it;
going through the measures of a dance, and after various evolutions
arriving at a conclusion, when the dancers may sit down and repose.
While there is life there is action and change. We go on, each thought
linked to the one which was its parent, each act to a previous act. No
joy or sorrow dies barren of progeny, which for ever generated and
generating, weaves the chain that make our life:

Un dia llama à otro dia
y asi llama, y encadena
llanto à llanto, y pena à pena.


Truly disappointment is the guardian deity of human life; she sits at
the threshold of unborn time, and marshals the events as they come
forth. Once my heart sat lightly in my bosom; all the beauty of the
world was doubly beautiful, irradiated by the sun-light shed from my
own soul. O wherefore are love and ruin for ever joined in this our
mortal dream? So that when we make our hearts a lair for that gently
seeming beast, its companion enters with it, and pitilessly lays waste
what might have been an home and a shelter.”

By degrees his health was shaken by his misery, and then his intellect
yielded to the same tyranny. His manners grew wild; he was sometimes
ferocious, sometimes absorbed in speechless melancholy. Suddenly Evadne
quitted London for Paris; he followed, and overtook her when the vessel
was about to sail; none knew what passed between them, but Perdita had
never seen him since; he lived in seclusion, no one knew where,
attended by such persons as his mother selected for that purpose.




CHAPTER IV.


The next day Lord Raymond called at Perdita’s cottage, on his way to
Windsor Castle. My sister’s heightened colour and sparkling eyes half
revealed her secret to me. He was perfectly self-possessed; he accosted
us both with courtesy, seemed immediately to enter into our feelings,
and to make one with us. I scanned his physiognomy, which varied as he
spoke, yet was beautiful in every change. The usual expression of his
eyes was soft, though at times he could make them even glare with
ferocity; his complexion was colourless; and every trait spoke
predominate self-will; his smile was pleasing, though disdain too often
curled his lips—lips which to female eyes were the very throne of
beauty and love. His voice, usually gentle, often startled you by a
sharp discordant note, which shewed that his usual low tone was rather
the work of study than nature. Thus full of contradictions, unbending
yet haughty, gentle yet fierce, tender and again neglectful, he by some
strange art found easy entrance to the admiration and affection of
women; now caressing and now tyrannizing over them according to his
mood, but in every change a despot.

At the present time Raymond evidently wished to appear amiable. Wit,
hilarity, and deep observation were mingled in his talk, rendering
every sentence that he uttered as a flash of light. He soon conquered
my latent distaste; I endeavoured to watch him and Perdita, and to keep
in mind every thing I had heard to his disadvantage. But all appeared
so ingenuous, and all was so fascinating, that I forgot everything
except the pleasure his society afforded me. Under the idea of
initiating me in the scene of English politics and society, of which I
was soon to become a part, he narrated a number of anecdotes, and
sketched many characters; his discourse, rich and varied, flowed on,
pervading all my senses with pleasure. But for one thing he would have
been completely triumphant. He alluded to Adrian, and spoke of him with
that disparagement that the worldly wise always attach to enthusiasm.
He perceived the cloud gathering, and tried to dissipate it; but the
strength of my feelings would not permit me to pass thus lightly over
this sacred subject; so I said emphatically, “Permit me to remark, that
I am devotedly attached to the Earl of Windsor; he is my best friend
and benefactor. I reverence his goodness, I accord with his opinions,
and bitterly lament his present, and I trust temporary, illness. That
illness, from its peculiarity, makes it painful to me beyond words to
hear him mentioned, unless in terms of respect and affection.”

Raymond replied; but there was nothing conciliatory in his reply. I saw
that in his heart he despised those dedicated to any but worldly idols.
“Every man,” he said, “dreams about something, love, honour, and
pleasure; you dream of friendship, and devote yourself to a maniac;
well, if that be your vocation, doubtless you are in the right to
follow it.”—

Some reflection seemed to sting him, and the spasm of pain that for a
moment convulsed his countenance, checked my indignation. “Happy are
dreamers,” he continued, “so that they be not awakened! Would I could
dream! but ‘broad and garish day’ is the element in which I live; the
dazzling glare of reality inverts the scene for me. Even the ghost of
friendship has departed, and love”——He broke off; nor could I guess
whether the disdain that curled his lip was directed against the
passion, or against himself for being its slave.

This account may be taken as a sample of my intercourse with Lord
Raymond. I became intimate with him, and each day afforded me occasion
to admire more and more his powerful and versatile talents, that
together with his eloquence, which was graceful and witty, and his
wealth now immense, caused him to be feared, loved, and hated beyond
any other man in England.

My descent, which claimed interest, if not respect, my former
connection with Adrian, the favour of the ambassador, whose secretary I
had been, and now my intimacy with Lord Raymond, gave me easy access to
the fashionable and political circles of England. To my inexperience we
at first appeared on the eve of a civil war; each party was violent,
acrimonious, and unyielding. Parliament was divided by three factions,
aristocrats, democrats, and royalists. After Adrian’s declared
predeliction to the republican form of government, the latter party had
nearly died away, chiefless, guideless; but, when Lord Raymond came
forward as its leader, it revived with redoubled force. Some were
royalists from prejudice and ancient affection, and there were many
moderately inclined who feared alike the capricious tyranny of the
popular party, and the unbending despotism of the aristocrats. More
than a third of the members ranged themselves under Raymond, and their
number was perpetually encreasing. The aristocrats built their hopes on
their preponderant wealth and influence; the reformers on the force of
the nation itself; the debates were violent, more violent the
discourses held by each knot of politicians as they assembled to
arrange their measures. Opprobrious epithets were bandied about,
resistance even to the death threatened; meetings of the populace
disturbed the quiet order of the country; except in war, how could all
this end? Even as the destructive flames were ready to break forth, I
saw them shrink back; allayed by the absence of the military, by the
aversion entertained by every one to any violence, save that of speech,
and by the cordial politeness and even friendship of the hostile
leaders when they met in private society. I was from a thousand motives
induced to attend minutely to the course of events, and watch each turn
with intense anxiety.

I could not but perceive that Perdita loved Raymond; methought also
that he regarded the fair daughter of Verney with admiration and
tenderness. Yet I knew that he was urging forward his marriage with the
presumptive heiress of the Earldom of Windsor, with keen expectation of
the advantages that would thence accrue to him. All the ex-queen’s
friends were his friends; no week passed that he did not hold
consultations with her at Windsor.

I had never seen the sister of Adrian. I had heard that she was lovely,
amiable, and fascinating. Wherefore should I see her? There are times
when we have an indefinable sentiment of impending change for better or
for worse, to arise from an event; and, be it for better or for worse,
we fear the change, and shun the event. For this reason I avoided this
high-born damsel. To me she was everything and nothing; her very name
mentioned by another made me start and tremble; the endless discussion
concerning her union with Lord Raymond was real agony to me. Methought
that, Adrian withdrawn from active life, and this beauteous Idris, a
victim probably to her mother’s ambitious schemes, I ought to come
forward to protect her from undue influence, guard her from
unhappiness, and secure to her freedom of choice, the right of every
human being. Yet how was I to do this? She herself would disdain my
interference. Since then I must be an object of indifference or
contempt to her, better, far better avoid her, nor expose myself before
her and the scornful world to the chance of playing the mad game of a
fond, foolish Icarus. One day, several months after my return to
England, I quitted London to visit my sister. Her society was my chief
solace and delight; and my spirits always rose at the expectation of
seeing her. Her conversation was full of pointed remark and
discernment; in her pleasant alcove, redolent with sweetest flowers,
adorned by magnificent casts, antique vases, and copies of the finest
pictures of Raphael, Correggio, and Claude, painted by herself, I
fancied myself in a fairy retreat untainted by and inaccessible to the
noisy contentions of politicians and the frivolous pursuits of fashion.
On this occasion, my sister was not alone; nor could I fail to
recognise her companion: it was Idris, the till now unseen object of my
mad idolatry.

In what fitting terms of wonder and delight, in what choice expression
and soft flow of language, can I usher in the loveliest, wisest, best?
How in poor assemblage of words convey the halo of glory that
surrounded her, the thousand graces that waited unwearied on her. The
first thing that struck you on beholding that charming countenance was
its perfect goodness and frankness; candour sat upon her brow,
simplicity in her eyes, heavenly benignity in her smile. Her tall slim
figure bent gracefully as a poplar to the breezy west, and her gait,
goddess-like, was as that of a winged angel new alit from heaven’s high
floor; the pearly fairness of her complexion was stained by a pure
suffusion; her voice resembled the low, subdued tenor of a flute. It is
easiest perhaps to describe by contrast. I have detailed the
perfections of my sister; and yet she was utterly unlike Idris.
Perdita, even where she loved, was reserved and timid; Idris was frank
and confiding. The one recoiled to solitude, that she might there
entrench herself from disappointment and injury; the other walked forth
in open day, believing that none would harm her. Wordsworth has
compared a beloved female to two fair objects in nature; but his lines
always appeared to me rather a contrast than a similitude:

A violet by a mossy stone
    Half hidden from the eye,
Fair as a star when only one
    Is shining in the sky.


Such a violet was sweet Perdita, trembling to entrust herself to the
very air, cowering from observation, yet betrayed by her excellences;
and repaying with a thousand graces the labour of those who sought her
in her lonely bye-path. Idris was as the star, set in single splendour
in the dim anadem of balmy evening; ready to enlighten and delight the
subject world, shielded herself from every taint by her unimagined
distance from all that was not like herself akin to heaven.

I found this vision of beauty in Perdita’s alcove, in earnest
conversation with its inmate. When my sister saw me, she rose, and
taking my hand, said, “He is here, even at our wish; this is Lionel, my
brother.” Idris arose also, and bent on me her eyes of celestial blue,
and with grace peculiar said—“You hardly need an introduction; we have
a picture, highly valued by my father, which declares at once your
name. Verney, you will acknowledge this tie, and as my brother’s
friend, I feel that I may trust you.”

Then, with lids humid with a tear and trembling voice, she continued—
“Dear friends, do not think it strange that now, visiting you for the
first time, I ask your assistance, and confide my wishes and fears to
you. To you alone do I dare speak; I have heard you commended by
impartial spectators; you are my brother’s friends, therefore you must
be mine. What can I say? if you refuse to aid me, I am lost indeed!”
She cast up her eyes, while wonder held her auditors mute; then, as if
carried away by her feelings, she cried—“My brother! beloved, ill-fated
Adrian! how speak of your misfortunes? Doubtless you have both heard
the current tale; perhaps believe the slander; but he is not mad! Were
an angel from the foot of God’s throne to assert it, never, never would
I believe it. He is wronged, betrayed, imprisoned—save him! Verney, you
must do this; seek him out in whatever part of the island he is
immured; find him, rescue him from his persecutors, restore him to
himself, to me—on the wide earth I have none to love but only him!”

Her earnest appeal, so sweetly and passionately expressed, filled me
with wonder and sympathy; and, when she added, with thrilling voice and
look, “Do you consent to undertake this enterprize?” I vowed, with
energy and truth, to devote myself in life and death to the restoration
and welfare of Adrian. We then conversed on the plan I should pursue,
and discussed the probable means of discovering his residence. While we
were in earnest discourse, Lord Raymond entered unannounced: I saw
Perdita tremble and grow deadly pale, and the cheeks of Idris glow with
purest blushes. He must have been astonished at our conclave, disturbed
by it I should have thought; but nothing of this appeared; he saluted
my companions, and addressed me with a cordial greeting. Idris appeared
suspended for a moment, and then with extreme sweetness, she said,
“Lord Raymond, I confide in your goodness and honour.”

Smiling haughtily, he bent his head, and replied, with emphasis, “Do
you indeed confide, Lady Idris?”

She endeavoured to read his thought, and then answered with dignity,
“As you please. It is certainly best not to compromise oneself by any
concealment.”

“Pardon me,” he replied, “if I have offended. Whether you trust me or
not, rely on my doing my utmost to further your wishes, whatever they
may be.”

Idris smiled her thanks, and rose to take leave. Lord Raymond requested
permission to accompany her to Windsor Castle, to which she consented,
and they quitted the cottage together. My sister and I were left—truly
like two fools, who fancied that they had obtained a golden treasure,
till daylight shewed it to be lead—two silly, luckless flies, who had
played in sunbeams and were caught in a spider’s web. I leaned against
the casement, and watched those two glorious creatures, till they
disappeared in the forest-glades; and then I turned. Perdita had not
moved; her eyes fixed on the ground, her cheeks pale, her very lips
white, motionless and rigid, every feature stamped by woe, she sat.
Half frightened, I would have taken her hand; but she shudderingly
withdrew it, and strove to collect herself. I entreated her to speak to
me: “Not now,” she replied, “nor do you speak to me, my dear Lionel;
you _can_ say nothing, for you know nothing. I will see you to-morrow;
in the meantime, adieu!” She rose, and walked from the room; but
pausing at the door, and leaning against it, as if her over-busy
thoughts had taken from her the power of supporting herself, she said,
“Lord Raymond will probably return. Will you tell him that he must
excuse me to-day, for I am not well. I will see him to-morrow if he
wishes it, and you also. You had better return to London with him; you
can there make the enquiries agreed upon, concerning the Earl of
Windsor and visit me again to-morrow, before you proceed on your
journey—till then, farewell!”

She spoke falteringly, and concluded with a heavy sigh. I gave my
assent to her request; and she left me. I felt as if, from the order of
the systematic world, I had plunged into chaos, obscure, contrary,
unintelligible. That Raymond should marry Idris was more than ever
intolerable; yet my passion, though a giant from its birth, was too
strange, wild, and impracticable, for me to feel at once the misery I
perceived in Perdita. How should I act? She had not confided in me; I
could not demand an explanation from Raymond without the hazard of
betraying what was perhaps her most treasured secret. I would obtain
the truth from her the following day—in the mean time—But, while I was
occupied by multiplying reflections, Lord Raymond returned. He asked
for my sister; and I delivered her message. After musing on it for a
moment, he asked me if I were about to return to London, and if I would
accompany him: I consented. He was full of thought, and remained silent
during a considerable part of our ride; at length he said, “I must
apologize to you for my abstraction; the truth is, Ryland’s motion
comes on to-night, and I am considering my reply.”

Ryland was the leader of the popular party, a hard-headed man, and in
his way eloquent; he had obtained leave to bring in a bill making it
treason to endeavour to change the present state of the English
government and the standing laws of the republic. This attack was
directed against Raymond and his machinations for the restoration of
the monarchy.

Raymond asked me if I would accompany him to the House that evening. I
remembered my pursuit for intelligence concerning Adrian; and, knowing
that my time would be fully occupied, I excused myself. “Nay,” said my
companion, “I can free you from your present impediment. You are going
to make enquiries concerning the Earl of Windsor. I can answer them at
once, he is at the Duke of Athol’s seat at Dunkeld. On the first
approach of his disorder, he travelled about from one place to another;
until, arriving at that romantic seclusion he refused to quit it, and
we made arrangements with the Duke for his continuing there.”

I was hurt by the careless tone with which he conveyed this
information, and replied coldly: “I am obliged to you for your
intelligence, and will avail myself of it.”

“You shall, Verney,” said he, “and if you continue of the same mind, I
will facilitate your views. But first witness, I beseech you, the
result of this night’s contest, and the triumph I am about to achieve,
if I may so call it, while I fear that victory is to me defeat. What
can I do? My dearest hopes appear to be near their fulfilment. The
ex-queen gives me Idris; Adrian is totally unfitted to succeed to the
earldom, and that earldom in my hands becomes a kingdom. By the
reigning God it is true; the paltry earldom of Windsor shall no longer
content him, who will inherit the rights which must for ever appertain
to the person who possesses it. The Countess can never forget that she
has been a queen, and she disdains to leave a diminished inheritance to
her children; her power and my wit will rebuild the throne, and this
brow will be clasped by a kingly diadem.—I can do this—I can marry
Idris.”—-

He stopped abruptly, his countenance darkened, and its expression
changed again and again under the influence of internal passion. I
asked, “Does Lady Idris love you?”

“What a question,” replied he laughing. “She will of course, as I shall
her, when we are married.”

“You begin late,” said I, ironically, “marriage is usually considered
the grave, and not the cradle of love. So you are about to love her,
but do not already?”

“Do not catechise me, Lionel; I will do my duty by her, be assured.
Love! I must steel my heart against _that_; expel it from its tower of
strength, barricade it out: the fountain of love must cease to play,
its waters be dried up, and all passionate thoughts attendant on it
die—that is to say, the love which would rule me, not that which I
rule. Idris is a gentle, pretty, sweet little girl; it is impossible
not to have an affection for her, and I have a very sincere one; only
do not speak of love —love, the tyrant and the tyrant-queller; love,
until now my conqueror, now my slave; the hungry fire, the untameable
beast, the fanged snake—no—no—I will have nothing to do with that love.
Tell me, Lionel, do you consent that I should marry this young lady?”

He bent his keen eyes upon me, and my uncontrollable heart swelled in
my bosom. I replied in a calm voice—but how far from calm was the
thought imaged by my still words—“Never! I can never consent that Lady
Idris should be united to one who does not love her.”

“Because you love her yourself.”

“Your Lordship might have spared that taunt; I do not, dare not love
her.”

“At least,” he continued haughtily, “she does not love you. I would not
marry a reigning sovereign, were I not sure that her heart was free.
But, O, Lionel! a kingdom is a word of might, and gently sounding are
the terms that compose the style of royalty. Were not the mightiest men
of the olden times kings? Alexander was a king; Solomon, the wisest of
men, was a king; Napoleon was a king; Cæsar died in his attempt to
become one, and Cromwell, the puritan and king-killer, aspired to
regality. The father of Adrian yielded up the already broken sceptre of
England; but I will rear the fallen plant, join its dismembered frame,
and exalt it above all the flowers of the field.

“You need not wonder that I freely discover Adrian’s abode. Do not
suppose that I am wicked or foolish enough to found my purposed
sovereignty on a fraud, and one so easily discovered as the truth or
falsehood of the Earl’s insanity. I am just come from him. Before I
decided on my marriage with Idris, I resolved to see him myself again,
and to judge of the probability of his recovery.—He is irrecoverably
mad.”

I gasped for breath—

“I will not detail to you,” continued Raymond, “the melancholy
particulars. You shall see him, and judge for yourself; although I fear
this visit, useless to him, will be insufferably painful to you. It has
weighed on my spirits ever since. Excellent and gentle as he is even in
the downfall of his reason, I do not worship him as you do, but I would
give all my hopes of a crown and my right hand to boot, to see him
restored to himself.”

His voice expressed the deepest compassion: “Thou most unaccountable
being,” I cried, “whither will thy actions tend, in all this maze of
purpose in which thou seemest lost?”

“Whither indeed? To a crown, a golden be-gemmed crown, I hope; and yet
I dare not trust and though I dream of a crown and wake for one, ever
and anon a busy devil whispers to me, that it is but a fool’s cap that
I seek, and that were I wise, I should trample on it, and take in its
stead, that which is worth all the crowns of the east and
presidentships of the west.”

“And what is that?”

“If I do make it my choice, then you shall know; at present I dare not
speak, even think of it.”

Again he was silent, and after a pause turned to me laughingly. When
scorn did not inspire his mirth, when it was genuine gaiety that
painted his features with a joyous expression, his beauty became
super-eminent, divine. “Verney,” said he, “my first act when I become
King of England, will be to unite with the Greeks, take Constantinople,
and subdue all Asia. I intend to be a warrior, a conqueror; Napoleon’s
name shall vail to mine; and enthusiasts, instead of visiting his rocky
grave, and exalting the merits of the fallen, shall adore my majesty,
and magnify my illustrious achievements.”

I listened to Raymond with intense interest. Could I be other than all
ear, to one who seemed to govern the whole earth in his grasping
imagination, and who only quailed when he attempted to rule himself.
Then on his word and will depended my own happiness—the fate of all
dear to me. I endeavoured to divine the concealed meaning of his words.
Perdita’s name was not mentioned; yet I could not doubt that love for
her caused the vacillation of purpose that he exhibited. And who was so
worthy of love as my noble-minded sister? Who deserved the hand of this
self-exalted king more than she whose glance belonged to a queen of
nations? who loved him, as he did her; notwithstanding that
disappointment quelled her passion, and ambition held strong combat
with his.

We went together to the House in the evening. Raymond, while he knew
that his plans and prospects were to be discussed and decided during
the expected debate, was gay and careless. An hum, like that of ten
thousand hives of swarming bees, stunned us as we entered the
coffee-room. Knots of politicians were assembled with anxious brows and
loud or deep voices. The aristocratical party, the richest and most
influential men in England, appeared less agitated than the others, for
the question was to be discussed without their interference. Near the
fire was Ryland and his supporters. Ryland was a man of obscure birth
and of immense wealth, inherited from his father, who had been a
manufacturer. He had witnessed, when a young man, the abdication of the
king, and the amalgamation of the two houses of Lords and Commons; he
had sympathized with these popular encroachments, and it had been the
business of his life to consolidate and encrease them. Since then, the
influence of the landed proprietors had augmented; and at first Ryland
was not sorry to observe the machinations of Lord Raymond, which drew
off many of his opponent’s partizans. But the thing was now going too
far. The poorer nobility hailed the return of sovereignty, as an event
which would restore them to their power and rights, now lost. The half
extinct spirit of royalty roused itself in the minds of men; and they,
willing slaves, self-constituted subjects, were ready to bend their
necks to the yoke. Some erect and manly spirits still remained, pillars
of state; but the word republic had grown stale to the vulgar ear; and
many—the event would prove whether it was a majority— pined for the
tinsel and show of royalty. Ryland was roused to resistance; he
asserted that his sufferance alone had permitted the encrease of this
party; but the time for indulgence was passed, and with one motion of
his arm he would sweep away the cobwebs that blinded his countrymen.

When Raymond entered the coffee-room, his presence was hailed by his
friends almost with a shout. They gathered round him, counted their
numbers, and detailed the reasons why they were now to receive an
addition of such and such members, who had not yet declared themselves.
Some trifling business of the House having been gone through, the
leaders took their seats in the chamber; the clamour of voices
continued, till Ryland arose to speak, and then the slightest whispered
observation was audible. All eyes were fixed upon him as he
stood—ponderous of frame, sonorous of voice, and with a manner which,
though not graceful, was impressive. I turned from his marked, iron
countenance to Raymond, whose face, veiled by a smile, would not betray
his care; yet his lips quivered somewhat, and his hand clasped the
bench on which he sat, with a convulsive strength that made the muscles
start again.

Ryland began by praising the present state of the British empire. He
recalled past years to their memory; the miserable contentions which in
the time of our fathers arose almost to civil war, the abdication of
the late king, and the foundation of the republic. He described this
republic; shewed how it gave privilege to each individual in the state,
to rise to consequence, and even to temporary sovereignty. He compared
the royal and republican spirit; shewed how the one tended to enslave
the minds of men; while all the institutions of the other served to
raise even the meanest among us to something great and good. He shewed
how England had become powerful, and its inhabitants valiant and wise,
by means of the freedom they enjoyed. As he spoke, every heart swelled
with pride, and every cheek glowed with delight to remember, that each
one there was English, and that each supported and contributed to the
happy state of things now commemorated. Ryland’s fervour increased—his
eyes lighted up—his voice assumed the tone of passion. There was one
man, he continued, who wished to alter all this, and bring us back to
our days of impotence and contention:—one man, who would dare arrogate
the honour which was due to all who claimed England as their
birthplace, and set his name and style above the name and style of his
country. I saw at this juncture that Raymond changed colour; his eyes
were withdrawn from the orator, and cast on the ground; the listeners
turned from one to the other; but in the meantime the speaker’s voice
filled their ears—the thunder of his denunciations influenced their
senses. The very boldness of his language gave him weight; each knew
that he spoke truth—a truth known, but not acknowledged. He tore from
reality the mask with which she had been clothed; and the purposes of
Raymond, which before had crept around, ensnaring by stealth, now stood
a hunted stag—even at bay—as all perceived who watched the
irrepressible changes of his countenance. Ryland ended by moving, that
any attempt to re-erect the kingly power should be declared treason,
and he a traitor who should endeavour to change the present form of
government. Cheers and loud acclamations followed the close of his
speech.

After his motion had been seconded, Lord Raymond rose,—his countenance
bland, his voice softly melodious, his manner soothing, his grace and
sweetness came like the mild breathing of a flute, after the loud,
organ-like voice of his adversary. He rose, he said, to speak in favour
of the honourable member’s motion, with one slight amendment subjoined.
He was ready to go back to old times, and commemorate the contests of
our fathers, and the monarch’s abdication. Nobly and greatly, he said,
had the illustrious and last sovereign of England sacrificed himself to
the apparent good of his country, and divested himself of a power which
could only be maintained by the blood of his subjects—these subjects
named so no more, these, his friends and equals, had in gratitude
conferred certain favours and distinctions on him and his family for
ever. An ample estate was allotted to them, and they took the first
rank among the peers of Great Britain. Yet it might be conjectured that
they had not forgotten their ancient heritage; and it was hard that his
heir should suffer alike with any other pretender, if he attempted to
regain what by ancient right and inheritance belonged to him. He did
not say that he should favour such an attempt; but he did say that such
an attempt would be venial; and, if the aspirant did not go so far as
to declare war, and erect a standard in the kingdom, his fault ought to
be regarded with an indulgent eye. In his amendment he proposed, that
an exception should be made in the bill in favour of any person who
claimed the sovereign power in right of the earls of Windsor. Nor did
Raymond make an end without drawing in vivid and glowing colours, the
splendour of a kingdom, in opposition to the commercial spirit of
republicanism. He asserted, that each individual under the English
monarchy, was then as now, capable of attaining high rank and
power—with one only exception, that of the function of chief
magistrate; higher and nobler rank, than a bartering, timorous
commonwealth could afford. And for this one exception, to what did it
amount? The nature of riches and influence forcibly confined the list
of candidates to a few of the wealthiest; and it was much to be feared,
that the ill-humour and contention generated by this triennial
struggle, would counterbalance its advantages in impartial eyes. I can
ill record the flow of language and graceful turns of expression, the
wit and easy raillery that gave vigour and influence to his speech. His
manner, timid at first, became firm—his changeful face was lit up to
superhuman brilliancy; his voice, various as music, was like that
enchanting.

It were useless to record the debate that followed this harangue. Party
speeches were delivered, which clothed the question in cant, and veiled
its simple meaning in a woven wind of words. The motion was lost;
Ryland withdrew in rage and despair; and Raymond, gay and exulting,
retired to dream of his future kingdom.




CHAPTER IV.


Is there such a feeling as love at first sight? And if there be, in
what does its nature differ from love founded in long observation and
slow growth? Perhaps its effects are not so permanent; but they are,
while they last, as violent and intense. We walk the pathless mazes of
society, vacant of joy, till we hold this clue, leading us through that
labyrinth to paradise. Our nature dim, like to an unlighted torch,
sleeps in formless blank till the fire attain it; this life of life,
this light to moon, and glory to the sun. What does it matter, whether
the fire be struck from flint and steel, nourished with care into a
flame, slowly communicated to the dark wick, or whether swiftly the
radiant power of light and warmth passes from a kindred power, and
shines at once the beacon and the hope. In the deepest fountain of my
heart the pulses were stirred; around, above, beneath, the clinging
Memory as a cloak enwrapt me. In no one moment of coming time did I
feel as I had done in time gone by. The spirit of Idris hovered in the
air I breathed; her eyes were ever and for ever bent on mine; her
remembered smile blinded my faint gaze, and caused me to walk as one,
not in eclipse, not in darkness and vacancy—but in a new and brilliant
light, too novel, too dazzling for my human senses. On every leaf, on
every small division of the universe, (as on the hyacinth ας is
engraved) was imprinted the talisman of my existence—SHE LIVES! SHE IS!
—I had not time yet to analyze my feeling, to take myself to task, and
leash in the tameless passion; all was one idea, one feeling, one
knowledge —it was my life!

But the die was cast—Raymond would marry Idris. The merry marriage
bells rung in my ears; I heard the nation’s gratulation which followed
the union; the ambitious noble uprose with swift eagle-flight, from the
lowly ground to regal supremacy—and to the love of Idris. Yet, not so!
She did not love him; she had called me her friend; she had smiled on
me; to me she had entrusted her heart’s dearest hope, the welfare of
Adrian. This reflection thawed my congealing blood, and again the tide
of life and love flowed impetuously onward, again to ebb as my busy
thoughts changed.

The debate had ended at three in the morning. My soul was in tumults; I
traversed the streets with eager rapidity. Truly, I was mad that night—
love—which I have named a giant from its birth, wrestled with despair!
My heart, the field of combat, was wounded by the iron heel of the one,
watered by the gushing tears of the other. Day, hateful to me, dawned;
I retreated to my lodgings—I threw myself on a couch—I slept—was it
sleep?—for thought was still alive—love and despair struggled still,
and I writhed with unendurable pain.

I awoke half stupefied; I felt a heavy oppression on me, but knew not
wherefore; I entered, as it were, the council-chamber of my brain, and
questioned the various ministers of thought therein assembled; too soon
I remembered all; too soon my limbs quivered beneath the tormenting
power; soon, too soon, I knew myself a slave!

Suddenly, unannounced, Lord Raymond entered my apartment. He came in
gaily, singing the Tyrolese song of liberty; noticed me with a gracious
nod, and threw himself on a sopha opposite the copy of a bust of the
Apollo Belvidere. After one or two trivial remarks, to which I sullenly
replied, he suddenly cried, looking at the bust, “I am called like that
victor! Not a bad idea; the head will serve for my new coinage, and be
an omen to all dutiful subjects of my future success.”

He said this in his most gay, yet benevolent manner, and smiled, not
disdainfully, but in playful mockery of himself. Then his countenance
suddenly darkened, and in that shrill tone peculiar to himself, he
cried, “I fought a good battle last night; higher conquest the plains
of Greece never saw me achieve. Now I am the first man in the state,
burthen of every ballad, and object of old women’s mumbled devotions.
What are your meditations? You, who fancy that you can read the human
soul, as your native lake reads each crevice and folding of its
surrounding hills—say what you think of me; king-expectant, angel or
devil, which?”

This ironical tone was discord to my bursting, over-boiling-heart; I
was nettled by his insolence, and replied with bitterness; “There is a
spirit, neither angel or devil, damned to limbo merely.” I saw his
cheeks become pale, and his lips whiten and quiver; his anger served
but to enkindle mine, and I answered with a determined look his eyes
which glared on me; suddenly they were withdrawn, cast down, a tear, I
thought, wetted the dark lashes; I was softened, and with involuntary
emotion added, “Not that you are such, my dear lord.”

I paused, even awed by the agitation he evinced; “Yes,” he said at
length, rising and biting his lip, as he strove to curb his passion;
“Such am I! You do not know me, Verney; neither you, nor our audience
of last night, nor does universal England know aught of me. I stand
here, it would seem, an elected king; this hand is about to grasp a
sceptre; these brows feel in each nerve the coming diadem. I appear to
have strength, power, victory; standing as a dome-supporting column
stands; and I am—a reed! I have ambition, and that attains its aim; my
nightly dreams are realized, my waking hopes fulfilled; a kingdom
awaits my acceptance, my enemies are overthrown. But here,” and he
struck his heart with violence, “here is the rebel, here the
stumbling-block; this over-ruling heart, which I may drain of its
living blood; but, while one fluttering pulsation remains, I am its
slave.”

He spoke with a broken voice, then bowed his head, and, hiding his face
in his hands, wept. I was still smarting from my own disappointment;
yet this scene oppressed me even to terror, nor could I interrupt his
access of passion. It subsided at length; and, throwing himself on the
couch, he remained silent and motionless, except that his changeful
features shewed a strong internal conflict. At last he rose, and said
in his usual tone of voice, “The time grows on us, Verney, I must away.
Let me not forget my chiefest errand here. Will you accompany me to
Windsor to-morrow? You will not be dishonoured by my society, and as
this is probably the last service, or disservice you can do me, will
you grant my request?”

He held out his hand with almost a bashful air. Swiftly I thought—Yes,
I will witness the last scene of the drama. Beside which, his mien
conquered me, and an affectionate sentiment towards him, again filled
my heart—I bade him command me. “Aye, that I will,” said he gaily,
“that’s my cue now; be with me to-morrow morning by seven; be secret
and faithful; and you shall be groom of the stole ere long.”

So saying, he hastened away, vaulted on his horse, and with a gesture
as if he gave me his hand to kiss, bade me another laughing adieu. Left
to myself, I strove with painful intensity to divine the motive of his
request and foresee the events of the coming day. The hours passed on
unperceived; my head ached with thought, the nerves seemed teeming with
the over full fraught—I clasped my burning brow, as if my fevered hand
could medicine its pain. I was punctual to the appointed hour on the
following day, and found Lord Raymond waiting for me. We got into his
carriage, and proceeded towards Windsor. I had tutored myself, and was
resolved by no outward sign to disclose my internal agitation.

“What a mistake Ryland made,” said Raymond, “when he thought to
overpower me the other night. He spoke well, very well; such an
harangue would have succeeded better addressed to me singly, than to
the fools and knaves assembled yonder. Had I been alone, I should have
listened to him with a wish to hear reason, but when he endeavoured to
vanquish me in my own territory, with my own weapons, he put me on my
mettle, and the event was such as all might have expected.”

I smiled incredulously, and replied: “I am of Ryland’s way of thinking,
and will, if you please, repeat all his arguments; we shall see how far
you will be induced by them, to change the royal for the patriotic
style.”

“The repetition would be useless,” said Raymond, “since I well remember
them, and have many others, self-suggested, which speak with
unanswerable persuasion.”

He did not explain himself, nor did I make any remark on his reply. Our
silence endured for some miles, till the country with open fields, or
shady woods and parks, presented pleasant objects to our view. After
some observations on the scenery and seats, Raymond said: “Philosophers
have called man a microcosm of nature, and find a reflection in the
internal mind for all this machinery visibly at work around us. This
theory has often been a source of amusement to me; and many an idle
hour have I spent, exercising my ingenuity in finding resemblances.
Does not Lord Bacon say that, ‘the falling from a discord to a concord,
which maketh great sweetness in music, hath an agreement with the
affections, which are re-integrated to the better after some dislikes?’
What a sea is the tide of passion, whose fountains are in our own
nature! Our virtues are the quick-sands, which shew themselves at calm
and low water; but let the waves arise and the winds buffet them, and
the poor devil whose hope was in their durability, finds them sink from
under him. The fashions of the world, its exigencies, educations and
pursuits, are winds to drive our wills, like clouds all one way; but
let a thunderstorm arise in the shape of love, hate, or ambition, and
the rack goes backward, stemming the opposing air in triumph.”

“Yet,” replied I, “nature always presents to our eyes the appearance of
a patient: while there is an active principle in man which is capable
of ruling fortune, and at least of tacking against the gale, till it in
some mode conquers it.”

“There is more of what is specious than true in your distinction,” said
my companion. “Did we form ourselves, choosing our dispositions, and
our powers? I find myself, for one, as a stringed instrument with
chords and stops—but I have no power to turn the pegs, or pitch my
thoughts to a higher or lower key.”

“Other men,” I observed, “may be better musicians.”

“I talk not of others, but myself,” replied Raymond, “and I am as fair
an example to go by as another. I cannot set my heart to a particular
tune, or run voluntary changes on my will. We are born; we choose
neither our parents, nor our station; we are educated by others, or by
the world’s circumstance, and this cultivation, mingling with our
innate disposition, is the soil in which our desires, passions, and
motives grow.”

“There is much truth in what you say,” said I, “and yet no man ever
acts upon this theory. Who, when he makes a choice, says, Thus I
choose, because I am necessitated? Does he not on the contrary feel a
freedom of will within him, which, though you may call it fallacious,
still actuates him as he decides?”

“Exactly so,” replied Raymond, “another link of the breakless chain.
Were I now to commit an act which would annihilate my hopes, and pluck
the regal garment from my mortal limbs, to clothe them in ordinary
weeds, would this, think you, be an act of free-will on my part?”

As we talked thus, I perceived that we were not going the ordinary road
to Windsor, but through Englefield Green, towards Bishopgate Heath. I
began to divine that Idris was not the object of our journey, but that
I was brought to witness the scene that was to decide the fate of
Raymond—and of Perdita. Raymond had evidently vacillated during his
journey, and irresolution was marked in every gesture as we entered
Perdita’s cottage. I watched him curiously, determined that, if this
hesitation should continue, I would assist Perdita to overcome herself,
and teach her to disdain the wavering love of him, who balanced between
the possession of a crown, and of her, whose excellence and affection
transcended the worth of a kingdom.

We found her in her flower-adorned alcove; she was reading the
newspaper report of the debate in parliament, that apparently doomed
her to hopelessness. That heart-sinking feeling was painted in her sunk
eyes and spiritless attitude; a cloud was on her beauty, and frequent
sighs were tokens of her distress. This sight had an instantaneous
effect on Raymond; his eyes beamed with tenderness, and remorse clothed
his manners with earnestness and truth. He sat beside her; and, taking
the paper from her hand, said, “Not a word more shall my sweet Perdita
read of this contention of madmen and fools. I must not permit you to
be acquainted with the extent of my delusion, lest you despise me;
although, believe me, a wish to appear before you, not vanquished, but
as a conqueror, inspired me during my wordy war.”

Perdita looked at him like one amazed; her expressive countenance shone
for a moment with tenderness; to see him only was happiness. But a
bitter thought swiftly shadowed her joy; she bent her eyes on the
ground, endeavouring to master the passion of tears that threatened to
overwhelm her. Raymond continued, “I will not act a part with you, dear
girl, or appear other than what I am, weak and unworthy, more fit to
excite your disdain than your love. Yet you do love me; I feel and know
that you do, and thence I draw my most cherished hopes. If pride guided
you, or even reason, you might well reject me. Do so; if your high
heart, incapable of my infirmity of purpose, refuses to bend to the
lowness of mine. Turn from me, if you will,—if you can. If your whole
soul does not urge you to forgive me—if your entire heart does not open
wide its door to admit me to its very centre, forsake me, never speak
to me again. I, though sinning against you almost beyond remission, I
also am proud; there must be no reserve in your pardon—no drawback to
the gift of your affection.”

Perdita looked down, confused, yet pleased. My presence embarrassed
her; so that she dared not turn to meet her lover’s eye, or trust her
voice to assure him of her affection; while a blush mantled her cheek,
and her disconsolate air was exchanged for one expressive of deep-felt
joy. Raymond encircled her waist with his arm, and continued, “I do not
deny that I have balanced between you and the highest hope that mortal
men can entertain; but I do so no longer. Take me—mould me to your
will, possess my heart and soul to all eternity. If you refuse to
contribute to my happiness, I quit England to-night, and will never set
foot in it again.

“Lionel, you hear: witness for me: persuade your sister to forgive the
injury I have done her; persuade her to be mine.”

“There needs no persuasion,” said the blushing Perdita, “except your
own dear promises, and my ready heart, which whispers to me that they
are true.”

That same evening we all three walked together in the forest, and, with
the garrulity which happiness inspires, they detailed to me the history
of their loves. It was pleasant to see the haughty Raymond and reserved
Perdita changed through happy love into prattling, playful children,
both losing their characteristic dignity in the fulness of mutual
contentment. A night or two ago Lord Raymond, with a brow of care, and
a heart oppressed with thought, bent all his energies to silence or
persuade the legislators of England that a sceptre was not too weighty
for his hand, while visions of dominion, war, and triumph floated
before him; now, frolicsome as a lively boy sporting under his mother’s
approving eye, the hopes of his ambition were complete, when he pressed
the small fair hand of Perdita to his lips; while she, radiant with
delight, looked on the still pool, not truly admiring herself, but
drinking in with rapture the reflection there made of the form of
herself and her lover, shewn for the first time in dear conjunction.

I rambled away from them. If the rapture of assured sympathy was
theirs, I enjoyed that of restored hope. I looked on the regal towers
of Windsor. High is the wall and strong the barrier that separate me
from my Star of Beauty. But not impassible. She will not be his. A few
more years dwell in thy native garden, sweet flower, till I by toil and
time acquire a right to gather thee. Despair not, nor bid me despair!
What must I do now? First I must seek Adrian, and restore him to her.
Patience, gentleness, and untired affection, shall recall him, if it be
true, as Raymond says, that he is mad; energy and courage shall rescue
him, if he be unjustly imprisoned.

After the lovers again joined me, we supped together in the alcove.
Truly it was a fairy’s supper; for though the air was perfumed by the
scent of fruits and wine, we none of us either ate or drank—even the
beauty of the night was unobserved; their extasy could not be increased
by outward objects, and I was wrapt in reverie. At about midnight
Raymond and I took leave of my sister, to return to town. He was all
gaiety; scraps of songs fell from his lips; every thought of his
mind—every object about us, gleamed under the sunshine of his mirth. He
accused me of melancholy, of ill-humour and envy.

“Not so,” said I, “though I confess that my thoughts are not occupied
as pleasantly as yours are. You promised to facilitate my visit to
Adrian; I conjure you to perform your promise. I cannot linger here; I
long to soothe —perhaps to cure the malady of my first and best friend.
I shall immediately depart for Dunkeld.”

“Thou bird of night,” replied Raymond, “what an eclipse do you throw
across my bright thoughts, forcing me to call to mind that melancholy
ruin, which stands in mental desolation, more irreparable than a
fragment of a carved column in a weed-grown field. You dream that you
can restore him? Daedalus never wound so inextricable an error round
Minotaur, as madness has woven about his imprisoned reason. Nor you,
nor any other Theseus, can thread the labyrinth, to which perhaps some
unkind Ariadne has the clue.”

“You allude to Evadne Zaimi: but she is not in England.”

“And were she,” said Raymond, “I would not advise her seeing him.
Better to decay in absolute delirium, than to be the victim of the
methodical unreason of ill-bestowed love. The long duration of his
malady has probably erased from his mind all vestige of her; and it
were well that it should never again be imprinted. You will find him at
Dunkeld; gentle and tractable he wanders up the hills, and through the
wood, or sits listening beside the waterfall. You may see him—his hair
stuck with wild flowers —his eyes full of untraceable meaning—his voice
broken—his person wasted to a shadow. He plucks flowers and weeds, and
weaves chaplets of them, or sails yellow leaves and bits of bark on the
stream, rejoicing in their safety, or weeping at their wreck. The very
memory half unmans me. By Heaven! the first tears I have shed since
boyhood rushed scalding into my eyes when I saw him.”

It needed not this last account to spur me on to visit him. I only
doubted whether or not I should endeavour to see Idris again, before I
departed. This doubt was decided on the following day. Early in the
morning Raymond came to me; intelligence had arrived that Adrian was
dangerously ill, and it appeared impossible that his failing strength
should surmount the disorder. “To-morrow,” said Raymond, “his mother
and sister set out for Scotland to see him once again.”

“And I go to-day,” I cried; “this very hour I will engage a sailing
balloon; I shall be there in forty-eight hours at furthest, perhaps in
less, if the wind is fair. Farewell, Raymond; be happy in having chosen
the better part in life. This turn of fortune revives me. I feared
madness, not sickness—I have a presentiment that Adrian will not die;
perhaps this illness is a crisis, and he may recover.”

Everything favoured my journey. The balloon rose about half a mile from
the earth, and with a favourable wind it hurried through the air, its
feathered vans cleaving the unopposing atmosphere. Notwithstanding the
melancholy object of my journey, my spirits were exhilarated by
reviving hope, by the swift motion of the airy pinnace, and the balmy
visitation of the sunny air. The pilot hardly moved the plumed
steerage, and the slender mechanism of the wings, wide unfurled, gave
forth a murmuring noise, soothing to the sense. Plain and hill, stream
and corn-field, were discernible below, while we unimpeded sped on
swift and secure, as a wild swan in his spring-tide flight. The machine
obeyed the slightest motion of the helm; and, the wind blowing
steadily, there was no let or obstacle to our course. Such was the
power of man over the elements; a power long sought, and lately won;
yet foretold in by-gone time by the prince of poets, whose verses I
quoted much to the astonishment of my pilot, when I told him how many
hundred years ago they had been written:—

Oh! human wit, thou can’st invent much ill,
Thou searchest strange arts: who would think by skill,
An heavy man like a light bird should stray,
And through the empty heavens find a way?


I alighted at Perth; and, though much fatigued by a constant exposure
to the air for many hours, I would not rest, but merely altering my
mode of conveyance, I went by land instead of air, to Dunkeld. The sun
was rising as I entered the opening of the hills. After the revolution
of ages Birnam hill was again covered with a young forest, while more
aged pines, planted at the very commencement of the nineteenth century
by the then Duke of Athol, gave solemnity and beauty to the scene. The
rising sun first tinged the pine tops; and my mind, rendered through my
mountain education deeply susceptible of the graces of nature, and now
on the eve of again beholding my beloved and perhaps dying friend, was
strangely influenced by the sight of those distant beams: surely they
were ominous, and as such I regarded them, good omens for Adrian, on
whose life my happiness depended.

Poor fellow! he lay stretched on a bed of sickness, his cheeks glowing
with the hues of fever, his eyes half closed, his breath irregular and
difficult. Yet it was less painful to see him thus, than to find him
fulfilling the animal functions uninterruptedly, his mind sick the
while. I established myself at his bedside; I never quitted it day or
night. Bitter task was it, to behold his spirit waver between death and
life: to see his warm cheek, and know that the very fire which burned
too fiercely there, was consuming the vital fuel; to hear his moaning
voice, which might never again articulate words of love and wisdom; to
witness the ineffectual motions of his limbs, soon to be wrapt in their
mortal shroud. Such for three days and nights appeared the consummation
which fate had decreed for my labours, and I became haggard and
spectre-like, through anxiety and watching. At length his eyes unclosed
faintly, yet with a look of returning life; he became pale and weak;
but the rigidity of his features was softened by approaching
convalescence. He knew me. What a brimful cup of joyful agony it was,
when his face first gleamed with the glance of recognition—when he
pressed my hand, now more fevered than his own, and when he pronounced
my name! No trace of his past insanity remained, to dash my joy with
sorrow.

This same evening his mother and sister arrived. The Countess of
Windsor was by nature full of energetic feeling; but she had very
seldom in her life permitted the concentrated emotions of her heart to
shew themselves on her features. The studied immovability of her
countenance; her slow, equable manner, and soft but unmelodious voice,
were a mask, hiding her fiery passions, and the impatience of her
disposition. She did not in the least resemble either of her children;
her black and sparkling eye, lit up by pride, was totally unlike the
blue lustre, and frank, benignant expression of either Adrian or Idris.
There was something grand and majestic in her motions, but nothing
persuasive, nothing amiable. Tall, thin, and strait, her face still
handsome, her raven hair hardly tinged with grey, her forehead arched
and beautiful, had not the eye-brows been somewhat scattered—it was
impossible not to be struck by her, almost to fear her. Idris appeared
to be the only being who could resist her mother, notwithstanding the
extreme mildness of her character. But there was a fearlessness and
frankness about her, which said that she would not encroach on
another’s liberty, but held her own sacred and unassailable.

The Countess cast no look of kindness on my worn-out frame, though
afterwards she thanked me coldly for my attentions. Not so Idris; her
first glance was for her brother; she took his hand, she kissed his
eye-lids, and hung over him with looks of compassion and love. Her eyes
glistened with tears when she thanked me, and the grace of her
expressions was enhanced, not diminished, by the fervour, which caused
her almost to falter as she spoke. Her mother, all eyes and ears, soon
interrupted us; and I saw, that she wished to dismiss me quietly, as
one whose services, now that his relatives had arrived, were of no use
to her son. I was harassed and ill, resolved not to give up my post,
yet doubting in what way I should assert it; when Adrian called me, and
clasping my hand, bade me not leave him. His mother, apparently
inattentive, at once understood what was meant, and seeing the hold we
had upon her, yielded the point to us.

The days that followed were full of pain to me; so that I sometimes
regretted that I had not yielded at once to the haughty lady, who
watched all my motions, and turned my beloved task of nursing my friend
to a work of pain and irritation. Never did any woman appear so
entirely made of mind, as the Countess of Windsor. Her passions had
subdued her appetites, even her natural wants; she slept little, and
hardly ate at all; her body was evidently considered by her as a mere
machine, whose health was necessary for the accomplishment of her
schemes, but whose senses formed no part of her enjoyment. There is
something fearful in one who can thus conquer the animal part of our
nature, if the victory be not the effect of consummate virtue; nor was
it without a mixture of this feeling, that I beheld the figure of the
Countess awake when others slept, fasting when I, abstemious naturally,
and rendered so by the fever that preyed on me, was forced to recruit
myself with food. She resolved to prevent or diminish my opportunities
of acquiring influence over her children, and circumvented my plans by
a hard, quiet, stubborn resolution, that seemed not to belong to flesh
and blood. War was at last tacitly acknowledged between us. We had many
pitched battles, during which no word was spoken, hardly a look was
interchanged, but in which each resolved not to submit to the other.
The Countess had the advantage of position; so I was vanquished, though
I would not yield.

I became sick at heart. My countenance was painted with the hues of ill
health and vexation. Adrian and Idris saw this; they attributed it to
my long watching and anxiety; they urged me to rest, and take care of
myself, while I most truly assured them, that my best medicine was
their good wishes; those, and the assured convalescence of my friend,
now daily more apparent. The faint rose again blushed on his cheek; his
brow and lips lost the ashy paleness of threatened dissolution; such
was the dear reward of my unremitting attention—and bounteous heaven
added overflowing recompence, when it gave me also the thanks and
smiles of Idris.

After the lapse of a few weeks, we left Dunkeld. Idris and her mother
returned immediately to Windsor, while Adrian and I followed by slow
journies and frequent stoppages, occasioned by his continued weakness.
As we traversed the various counties of fertile England, all wore an
exhilarating appearance to my companion, who had been so long secluded
by disease from the enjoyments of weather and scenery. We passed
through busy towns and cultivated plains. The husbandmen were getting
in their plenteous harvests, and the women and children, occupied by
light rustic toils, formed groupes of happy, healthful persons, the
very sight of whom carried cheerfulness to the heart. One evening,
quitting our inn, we strolled down a shady lane, then up a grassy
slope, till we came to an eminence, that commanded an extensive view of
hill and dale, meandering rivers, dark woods, and shining villages. The
sun was setting; and the clouds, straying, like new-shorn sheep,
through the vast fields of sky, received the golden colour of his
parting beams; the distant uplands shone out, and the busy hum of
evening came, harmonized by distance, on our ear. Adrian, who felt all
the fresh spirit infused by returning health, clasped his hands in
delight, and exclaimed with transport:

“O happy earth, and happy inhabitants of earth! A stately palace has
God built for you, O man! and worthy are you of your dwelling! Behold
the verdant carpet spread at our feet, and the azure canopy above; the
fields of earth which generate and nurture all things, and the track of
heaven, which contains and clasps all things. Now, at this evening
hour, at the period of repose and refection, methinks all hearts
breathe one hymn of love and thanksgiving, and we, like priests of old
on the mountain-tops, give a voice to their sentiment.

“Assuredly a most benignant power built up the majestic fabric we
inhabit, and framed the laws by which it endures. If mere existence,
and not happiness, had been the final end of our being, what need of
the profuse luxuries which we enjoy? Why should our dwelling place be
so lovely, and why should the instincts of nature minister pleasurable
sensations? The very sustaining of our animal machine is made
delightful; and our sustenance, the fruits of the field, is painted
with transcendant hues, endued with grateful odours, and palatable to
our taste. Why should this be, if HE were not good? We need houses to
protect us from the seasons, and behold the materials with which we are
provided; the growth of trees with their adornment of leaves; while
rocks of stone piled above the plains variegate the prospect with their
pleasant irregularity.

“Nor are outward objects alone the receptacles of the Spirit of Good.
Look into the mind of man, where wisdom reigns enthroned; where
imagination, the painter, sits, with his pencil dipt in hues lovelier
than those of sunset, adorning familiar life with glowing tints. What a
noble boon, worthy the giver, is the imagination! it takes from reality
its leaden hue: it envelopes all thought and sensation in a radiant
veil, and with an hand of beauty beckons us from the sterile seas of
life, to her gardens, and bowers, and glades of bliss. And is not love
a gift of the divinity? Love, and her child, Hope, which can bestow
wealth on poverty, strength on the weak, and happiness on the
sorrowing.

“My lot has not been fortunate. I have consorted long with grief,
entered the gloomy labyrinth of madness, and emerged, but half alive.
Yet I thank God that I have lived! I thank God, that I have beheld his
throne, the heavens, and earth, his footstool. I am glad that I have
seen the changes of his day; to behold the sun, fountain of light, and
the gentle pilgrim moon; to have seen the fire bearing flowers of the
sky, and the flowery stars of earth; to have witnessed the sowing and
the harvest. I am glad that I have loved, and have experienced
sympathetic joy and sorrow with my fellow-creatures. I am glad now to
feel the current of thought flow through my mind, as the blood through
the articulations of my frame; mere existence is pleasure; and I thank
God that I live!

“And all ye happy nurslings of mother-earth, do ye not echo my words?
Ye who are linked by the affectionate ties of nature, companions,
friends, lovers! fathers, who toil with joy for their offspring; women,
who while gazing on the living forms of their children, forget the
pains of maternity; children, who neither toil nor spin, but love and
are loved!

“Oh, that death and sickness were banished from our earthly home! that
hatred, tyranny, and fear could no longer make their lair in the human
heart! that each man might find a brother in his fellow, and a nest of
repose amid the wide plains of his inheritance! that the source of
tears were dry, and that lips might no longer form expressions of
sorrow. Sleeping thus under the beneficent eye of heaven, can evil
visit thee, O Earth, or grief cradle to their graves thy luckless
children? Whisper it not, let the demons hear and rejoice! The choice
is with us; let us will it, and our habitation becomes a paradise. For
the will of man is omnipotent, blunting the arrows of death, soothing
the bed of disease, and wiping away the tears of agony. And what is
each human being worth, if he do not put forth his strength to aid his
fellow-creatures? My soul is a fading spark, my nature frail as a spent
wave; but I dedicate all of intellect and strength that remains to me,
to that one work, and take upon me the task, as far as I am able, of
bestowing blessings on my fellow-men!”

His voice trembled, his eyes were cast up, his hands clasped, and his
fragile person was bent, as it were, with excess of emotion. The spirit
of life seemed to linger in his form, as a dying flame on an altar
flickers on the embers of an accepted sacrifice.




CHAPTER V.


When we arrived at Windsor, I found that Raymond and Perdita had
departed for the continent. I took possession of my sister’s cottage,
and blessed myself that I lived within view of Windsor Castle. It was a
curious fact, that at this period, when by the marriage of Perdita I
was allied to one of the richest individuals in England, and was bound
by the most intimate friendship to its chiefest noble, I experienced
the greatest excess of poverty that I had ever known. My knowledge of
the worldly principles of Lord Raymond, would have ever prevented me
from applying to him, however deep my distress might have been. It was
in vain that I repeated to myself with regard to Adrian, that his purse
was open to me; that one in soul, as we were, our fortunes ought also
to be common. I could never, while with him, think of his bounty as a
remedy to my poverty; and I even put aside hastily his offers of
supplies, assuring him of a falsehood, that I needed them not. How
could I say to this generous being, “Maintain me in idleness. You who
have dedicated your powers of mind and fortune to the benefit of your
species, shall you so misdirect your exertions, as to support in
uselessness the strong, healthy, and capable?”

And yet I dared not request him to use his influence that I might
obtain an honourable provision for myself—for then I should have been
obliged to leave Windsor. I hovered for ever around the walls of its
Castle, beneath its enshadowing thickets; my sole companions were my
books and my loving thoughts. I studied the wisdom of the ancients, and
gazed on the happy walls that sheltered the beloved of my soul. My mind
was nevertheless idle. I pored over the poetry of old times; I studied
the metaphysics of Plato and Berkeley. I read the histories of Greece
and Rome, and of England’s former periods, and I watched the movements
of the lady of my heart. At night I could see her shadow on the walls
of her apartment; by day I viewed her in her flower-garden, or riding
in the park with her usual companions. Methought the charm would be
broken if I were seen, but I heard the music of her voice and was
happy. I gave to each heroine of whom I read, her beauty and matchless
excellences—such was Antigone, when she guided the blind Œdipus to the
grove of the Eumenides, and discharged the funeral rites of Polynices;
such was Miranda in the unvisited cave of Prospero; such Haidee, on the
sands of the Ionian island. I was mad with excess of passionate
devotion; but pride, tameless as fire, invested my nature, and
prevented me from betraying myself by word or look.

In the mean time, while I thus pampered myself with rich mental
repasts, a peasant would have disdained my scanty fare, which I
sometimes robbed from the squirrels of the forest. I was, I own, often
tempted to recur to the lawless feats of my boy-hood, and knock down
the almost tame pheasants that perched upon the trees, and bent their
bright eyes on me. But they were the property of Adrian, the nurslings
of Idris; and so, although my imagination rendered sensual by
privation, made me think that they would better become the spit in my
kitchen, than the green leaves of the forest,

    Nathelesse,
I checked my haughty will, and did not eat;


but supped upon sentiment, and dreamt vainly of “such morsels sweet,”
as I might not waking attain.

But, at this period, the whole scheme of my existence was about to
change. The orphan and neglected son of Verney, was on the eve of being
linked to the mechanism of society by a golden chain, and to enter into
all the duties and affections of life. Miracles were to be wrought in
my favour, the machine of social life pushed with vast effort backward.
Attend, O reader! while I narrate this tale of wonders!

One day as Adrian and Idris were riding through the forest, with their
mother and accustomed companions, Idris, drawing her brother aside from
the rest of the cavalcade, suddenly asked him, “What had become of his
friend, Lionel Verney?”

“Even from this spot,” replied Adrian, pointing to my sister’s cottage,
“you can see his dwelling.”

“Indeed!” said Idris, “and why, if he be so near, does he not come to
see us, and make one of our society?”

“I often visit him,” replied Adrian; “but you may easily guess the
motives, which prevent him from coming where his presence may annoy any
one among us.”

“I do guess them,” said Idris, “and such as they are, I would not
venture to combat them. Tell me, however, in what way he passes his
time; what he is doing and thinking in his cottage retreat?”

“Nay, my sweet sister,” replied Adrian, “you ask me more than I can
well answer; but if you feel interest in him, why not visit him? He
will feel highly honoured, and thus you may repay a part of the
obligation I owe him, and compensate for the injuries fortune has done
him.”

“I will most readily accompany you to his abode,” said the lady, “not
that I wish that either of us should unburthen ourselves of our debt,
which, being no less than your life, must remain unpayable ever. But
let us go; to-morrow we will arrange to ride out together, and
proceeding towards that part of the forest, call upon him.”

The next evening therefore, though the autumnal change had brought on
cold and rain, Adrian and Idris entered my cottage. They found me
Curius-like, feasting on sorry fruits for supper; but they brought
gifts richer than the golden bribes of the Sabines, nor could I refuse
the invaluable store of friendship and delight which they bestowed.
Surely the glorious twins of Latona were not more welcome, when, in the
infancy of the world, they were brought forth to beautify and enlighten
this “sterile promontory,” than were this angelic pair to my lowly
dwelling and grateful heart. We sat like one family round my hearth.
Our talk was on subjects, unconnected with the emotions that evidently
occupied each; but we each divined the other’s thought, and as our
voices spoke of indifferent matters, our eyes, in mute language, told a
thousand things no tongue could have uttered.

They left me in an hour’s time. They left me happy—how unspeakably
happy. It did not require the measured sounds of human language to
syllable the story of my extasy. Idris had visited me; Idris I should
again and again see—my imagination did not wander beyond the
completeness of this knowledge. I trod air; no doubt, no fear, no hope
even, disturbed me; I clasped with my soul the fulness of contentment,
satisfied, undesiring, beatified.

For many days Adrian and Idris continued to visit me thus. In this dear
intercourse, love, in the guise of enthusiastic friendship, infused
more and more of his omnipotent spirit. Idris felt it. Yes, divinity of
the world, I read your characters in her looks and gesture; I heard
your melodious voice echoed by her—you prepared for us a soft and
flowery path, all gentle thoughts adorned it—your name, O Love, was not
spoken, but you stood the Genius of the Hour, veiled, and time, but no
mortal hand, might raise the curtain. Organs of articulate sound did
not proclaim the union of our hearts; for untoward circumstance allowed
no opportunity for the expression that hovered on our lips. Oh my pen!
haste thou to write what was, before the thought of what is, arrests
the hand that guides thee. If I lift up my eyes and see the desart
earth, and feel that those dear eyes have spent their mortal lustre,
and that those beauteous lips are silent, their “crimson leaves” faded,
for ever I am mute!

But you live, my Idris, even now you move before me! There was a glade,
O reader! a grassy opening in the wood; the retiring trees left its
velvet expanse as a temple for love; the silver Thames bounded it on
one side, and a willow bending down dipt in the water its Naiad hair,
dishevelled by the wind’s viewless hand. The oaks around were the home
of a tribe of nightingales—there am I now; Idris, in youth’s dear
prime, is by my side —remember, I am just twenty-two, and seventeen
summers have scarcely passed over the beloved of my heart. The river
swollen by autumnal rains, deluged the low lands, and Adrian in his
favourite boat is employed in the dangerous pastime of plucking the
topmost bough from a submerged oak. Are you weary of life, O Adrian,
that you thus play with danger?—

He has obtained his prize, and he pilots his boat through the flood;
our eyes were fixed on him fearfully, but the stream carried him away
from us; he was forced to land far lower down, and to make a
considerable circuit before he could join us. “He is safe!” said Idris,
as he leapt on shore, and waved the bough over his head in token of
success; “we will wait for him here.”

We were alone together; the sun had set; the song of the nightingales
began; the evening star shone distinct in the flood of light, which was
yet unfaded in the west. The blue eyes of my angelic girl were fixed on
this sweet emblem of herself: “How the light palpitates,” she said,
“which is that star’s life. Its vacillating effulgence seems to say
that its state, even like ours upon earth, is wavering and inconstant;
it fears, methinks, and it loves.”

“Gaze not on the star, dear, generous friend,” I cried, “read not love
in _its_ trembling rays; look not upon distant worlds; speak not of the
mere imagination of a sentiment. I have long been silent; long even to
sickness have I desired to speak to you, and submit my soul, my life,
my entire being to you. Look not on the star, dear love, or do, and let
that eternal spark plead for me; let it be my witness and my advocate,
silent as it shines—love is to me as light to the star; even so long as
that is uneclipsed by annihilation, so long shall I love you.”

Veiled for ever to the world’s callous eye must be the transport of
that moment. Still do I feel her graceful form press against my
full-fraught heart—still does sight, and pulse, and breath sicken and
fail, at the remembrance of that first kiss. Slowly and silently we
went to meet Adrian, whom we heard approaching.

I entreated Adrian to return to me after he had conducted his sister
home. And that same evening, walking among the moon-lit forest paths, I
poured forth my whole heart, its transport and its hope, to my friend.
For a moment he looked disturbed—“I might have foreseen this,” he said,
“what strife will now ensue! Pardon me, Lionel, nor wonder that the
expectation of contest with my mother should jar me, when else I should
delightedly confess that my best hopes are fulfilled, in confiding my
sister to your protection. If you do not already know it, you will soon
learn the deep hate my mother bears to the name Verney. I will converse
with Idris; then all that a friend can do, I will do; to her it must
belong to play the lover’s part, if she be capable of it.”

While the brother and sister were still hesitating in what manner they
could best attempt to bring their mother over to their party, she,
suspecting our meetings, taxed her children with them; taxed her fair
daughter with deceit, and an unbecoming attachment for one whose only
merit was being the son of the profligate favourite of her imprudent
father; and who was doubtless as worthless as he from whom he boasted
his descent. The eyes of Idris flashed at this accusation; she replied,
“I do not deny that I love Verney; prove to me that he is worthless;
and I will never see him more.”

“Dear Madam,” said Adrian, “let me entreat you to see him, to cultivate
his friendship. You will wonder then, as I do, at the extent of his
accomplishments, and the brilliancy of his talents.” (Pardon me, gentle
reader, this is not futile vanity;—not futile, since to know that
Adrian felt thus, brings joy even now to my lone heart).

“Mad and foolish boy!” exclaimed the angry lady, “you have chosen with
dreams and theories to overthrow my schemes for your own
aggrandizement; but you shall not do the same by those I have formed
for your sister. I but too well understand the fascination you both
labour under; since I had the same struggle with your father, to make
him cast off the parent of this youth, who hid his evil propensities
with the smoothness and subtlety of a viper. In those days how often
did I hear of his attractions, his wide spread conquests, his wit, his
refined manners. It is well when flies only are caught by such spiders’
webs; but is it for the high-born and powerful to bow their necks to
the flimsy yoke of these unmeaning pretensions? Were your sister indeed
the insignificant person she deserves to be, I would willingly leave
her to the fate, the wretched fate, of the wife of a man, whose very
person, resembling as it does his wretched father, ought to remind you
of the folly and vice it typifies—but remember, Lady Idris, it is not
alone the once royal blood of England that colours your veins, you are
a Princess of Austria, and every life-drop is akin to emperors and
kings. Are you then a fit mate for an uneducated shepherd-boy, whose
only inheritance is his father’s tarnished name?”

“I can make but one defence,” replied Idris, “the same offered by my
brother; see Lionel, converse with my shepherd-boy”—-The Countess
interrupted her indignantly—“Yours!”—she cried: and then, smoothing her
impassioned features to a disdainful smile, she continued—“We will talk
of this another time. All I now ask, all your mother, Idris, requests
is, that you will not see this upstart during the interval of one
month.”

“I dare not comply,” said Idris, “it would pain him too much. I have no
right to play with his feelings, to accept his proffered love, and then
sting him with neglect.”

“This is going too far,” her mother answered, with quivering lips, and
eyes again instinct by anger.

“Nay, Madam,” said Adrian, “unless my sister consent never to see him
again, it is surely an useless torment to separate them for a month.”

“Certainly,” replied the ex-queen, with bitter scorn, “his love, and
her love, and both their childish flutterings, are to be put in fit
comparison with my years of hope and anxiety, with the duties of the
offspring of kings, with the high and dignified conduct which one of
her descent ought to pursue. But it is unworthy of me to argue and
complain. Perhaps you will have the goodness to promise me not to marry
during that interval?”

This was asked only half ironically; and Idris wondered why her mother
should extort from her a solemn vow not to do, what she had never
dreamed of doing—but the promise was required and given.

All went on cheerfully now; we met as usual, and talked without dread
of our future plans. The Countess was so gentle, and even beyond her
wont, amiable with her children, that they began to entertain hopes of
her ultimate consent. She was too unlike them, too utterly alien to
their tastes, for them to find delight in her society, or in the
prospect of its continuance, but it gave them pleasure to see her
conciliating and kind. Once even, Adrian ventured to propose her
receiving me. She refused with a smile, reminding him that for the
present his sister had promised to be patient.

One day, after the lapse of nearly a month, Adrian received a letter
from a friend in London, requesting his immediate presence for the
furtherance of some important object. Guileless himself, Adrian feared
no deceit. I rode with him as far as Staines: he was in high spirits;
and, since I could not see Idris during his absence, he promised a
speedy return. His gaiety, which was extreme, had the strange effect of
awakening in me contrary feelings; a presentiment of evil hung over me;
I loitered on my return; I counted the hours that must elapse before I
saw Idris again. Wherefore should this be? What evil might not happen
in the mean time? Might not her mother take advantage of Adrian’s
absence to urge her beyond her sufferance, perhaps to entrap her? I
resolved, let what would befall, to see and converse with her the
following day. This determination soothed me. To-morrow, loveliest and
best, hope and joy of my life, to-morrow I will see thee—Fool, to dream
of a moment’s delay!

I went to rest. At past midnight I was awaked by a violent knocking. It
was now deep winter; it had snowed, and was still snowing; the wind
whistled in the leafless trees, despoiling them of the white flakes as
they fell; its drear moaning, and the continued knocking, mingled
wildly with my dreams— at length I was wide awake; hastily dressing
myself, I hurried to discover the cause of this disturbance, and to
open my door to the unexpected visitor. Pale as the snow that showered
about her, with clasped hands, Idris stood before me. “Save me!” she
exclaimed, and would have sunk to the ground had I not supported her.
In a moment however she revived, and, with energy, almost with
violence, entreated me to saddle horses, to take her away, away to
London—to her brother—at least to save her. I had no horses—she wrung
her hands. “What can I do?” she cried, “I am lost—we are both for ever
lost! But come—come with me, Lionel; here I must not stay,—we can get a
chaise at the nearest post-house; yet perhaps we have time! come, O
come with me to save and protect me!”

When I heard her piteous demands, while with disordered dress,
dishevelled hair, and aghast looks, she wrung her hands—the idea shot
across me is she also mad?—“Sweet one,” and I folded her to my heart,
“better repose than wander further;—rest—my beloved, I will make a
fire—you are chill.”

“Rest!” she cried, “repose! you rave, Lionel! If you delay we are lost;
come, I pray you, unless you would cast me off for ever.”

That Idris, the princely born, nursling of wealth and luxury, should
have come through the tempestuous winter-night from her regal abode,
and standing at my lowly door, conjure me to fly with her through
darkness and storm—was surely a dream—again her plaintive tones, the
sight of her loveliness assured me that it was no vision. Looking
timidly around, as if she feared to be overheard, she whispered: “I
have discovered—to-morrow —that is, to-day—already the to-morrow is
come—before dawn, foreigners, Austrians, my mother’s hirelings, are to
carry me off to Germany, to prison, to marriage—to anything, except you
and my brother —take me away, or soon they will be here!”

I was frightened by her vehemence, and imagined some mistake in her
incoherent tale; but I no longer hesitated to obey her. She had come by
herself from the Castle, three long miles, at midnight, through the
heavy snow; we must reach Englefield Green, a mile and a half further,
before we could obtain a chaise. She told me, that she had kept up her
strength and courage till her arrival at my cottage, and then both
failed. Now she could hardly walk. Supporting her as I did, still she
lagged: and at the distance of half a mile, after many stoppages,
shivering fits, and half faintings, she slipt from my supporting arm on
the snow, and with a torrent of tears averred that she must be taken,
for that she could not proceed. I lifted her up in my arms; her light
form rested on my breast.—I felt no burthen, except the internal one of
contrary and contending emotions. Brimming delight now invested me.
Again her chill limbs touched me as a torpedo; and I shuddered in
sympathy with her pain and fright. Her head lay on my shoulder, her
breath waved my hair, her heart beat near mine, transport made me
tremble, blinded me, annihilated me—till a suppressed groan, bursting
from her lips, the chattering of her teeth, which she strove vainly to
subdue, and all the signs of suffering she evinced, recalled me to the
necessity of speed and succour. At last I said to her, “There is
Englefield Green; there the inn. But, if you are seen thus strangely
circumstanced, dear Idris, even now your enemies may learn your flight
too soon: were it not better that I hired the chaise alone? I will put
you in safety meanwhile, and return to you immediately.”

She answered that I was right, and might do with her as I pleased. I
observed the door of a small out-house a-jar. I pushed it open; and,
with some hay strewed about, I formed a couch for her, placing her
exhausted frame on it, and covering her with my cloak. I feared to
leave her, she looked so wan and faint—but in a moment she re-acquired
animation, and, with that, fear; and again she implored me not to
delay. To call up the people of the inn, and obtain a conveyance and
horses, even though I harnessed them myself, was the work of many
minutes; minutes, each freighted with the weight of ages. I caused the
chaise to advance a little, waited till the people of the inn had
retired, and then made the post-boy draw up the carriage to the spot
where Idris, impatient, and now somewhat recovered, stood waiting for
me. I lifted her into the chaise; I assured her that with our four
horses we should arrive in London before five o’clock, the hour when
she would be sought and missed. I besought her to calm herself; a
kindly shower of tears relieved her, and by degrees she related her
tale of fear and peril.

That same night after Adrian’s departure, her mother had warmly
expostulated with her on the subject of her attachment to me. Every
motive, every threat, every angry taunt was urged in vain. She seemed
to consider that through me she had lost Raymond; I was the evil
influence of her life; I was even accused of encreasing and confirming
the mad and base apostacy of Adrian from all views of advancement and
grandeur; and now this miserable mountaineer was to steal her daughter.
Never, Idris related, did the angry lady deign to recur to gentleness
and persuasion; if she had, the task of resistance would have been
exquisitely painful. As it was, the sweet girl’s generous nature was
roused to defend, and ally herself with, my despised cause. Her mother
ended with a look of contempt and covert triumph, which for a moment
awakened the suspicions of Idris. When they parted for the night, the
Countess said, “To-morrow I trust your tone will be changed: be
composed; I have agitated you; go to rest; and I will send you a
medicine I always take when unduly restless—it will give you a quiet
night.”

By the time that she had with uneasy thoughts laid her fair cheek upon
her pillow, her mother’s servant brought a draught; a suspicion again
crossed her at this novel proceeding, sufficiently alarming to
determine her not to take the potion; but dislike of contention, and a
wish to discover whether there was any just foundation for her
conjectures, made her, she said, almost instinctively, and in
contradiction to her usual frankness, pretend to swallow the medicine.
Then, agitated as she had been by her mother’s violence, and now by
unaccustomed fears, she lay unable to sleep, starting at every sound.
Soon her door opened softly, and on her springing up, she heard a
whisper, “Not asleep yet,” and the door again closed. With a beating
heart she expected another visit, and when after an interval her
chamber was again invaded, having first assured herself that the
intruders were her mother and an attendant, she composed herself to
feigned sleep. A step approached her bed, she dared not move, she
strove to calm her palpitations, which became more violent, when she
heard her mother say mutteringly, “Pretty simpleton, little do you
think that your game is already at an end for ever.”

For a moment the poor girl fancied that her mother believed that she
had drank poison: she was on the point of springing up; when the
Countess, already at a distance from the bed, spoke in a low voice to
her companion, and again Idris listened: “Hasten,” said she, “there is
no time to lose— it is long past eleven; they will be here at five;
take merely the clothes necessary for her journey, and her
jewel-casket.” The servant obeyed; few words were spoken on either
side; but those were caught at with avidity by the intended victim. She
heard the name of her own maid mentioned;—“No, no,” replied her mother,
“she does not go with us; Lady Idris must forget England, and all
belonging to it.” And again she heard, “She will not wake till late
to-morrow, and we shall then be at sea.”——“All is ready,” at length the
woman announced. The Countess again came to her daughter’s bedside: “In
Austria at least,” she said, “you will obey. In Austria, where
obedience can be enforced, and no choice left but between an honourable
prison and a fitting marriage.”

Both then withdrew; though, as she went, the Countess said, “Softly;
all sleep; though all have not been prepared for sleep, like her. I
would not have any one suspect, or she might be roused to resistance,
and perhaps escape. Come with me to my room; we will remain there till
the hour agreed upon.” They went. Idris, panic-struck, but animated and
strengthened even by her excessive fear, dressed herself hurriedly, and
going down a flight of back-stairs, avoiding the vicinity of her
mother’s apartment, she contrived to escape from the castle by a low
window, and came through snow, wind, and obscurity to my cottage; nor
lost her courage, until she arrived, and, depositing her fate in my
hands, gave herself up to the desperation and weariness that
overwhelmed her.

I comforted her as well as I might. Joy and exultation, were mine, to
possess, and to save her. Yet not to excite fresh agitation in her,
“_per non turbar quel bel viso sereno_,” I curbed my delight. I strove
to quiet the eager dancing of my heart; I turned from her my eyes,
beaming with too much tenderness, and proudly, to dark night, and the
inclement atmosphere, murmured the expressions of my transport. We
reached London, methought, all too soon; and yet I could not regret our
speedy arrival, when I witnessed the extasy with which my beloved girl
found herself in her brother’s arms, safe from every evil, under his
unblamed protection.

Adrian wrote a brief note to his mother, informing her that Idris was
under his care and guardianship. Several days elapsed, and at last an
answer came, dated from Cologne. “It was useless,” the haughty and
disappointed lady wrote, “for the Earl of Windsor and his sister to
address again the injured parent, whose only expectation of
tranquillity must be derived from oblivion of their existence. Her
desires had been blasted, her schemes overthrown. She did not complain;
in her brother’s court she would find, not compensation for their
disobedience (filial unkindness admitted of none), but such a state of
things and mode of life, as might best reconcile her to her fate. Under
such circumstances, she positively declined any communication with
them.”

Such were the strange and incredible events, that finally brought about
my union with the sister of my best friend, with my adored Idris. With
simplicity and courage she set aside the prejudices and opposition
which were obstacles to my happiness, nor scrupled to give her hand,
where she had given her heart. To be worthy of her, to raise myself to
her height through the exertion of talents and virtue, to repay her
love with devoted, unwearied tenderness, were the only thanks I could
offer for the matchless gift.




CHAPTER VI.


And now let the reader, passing over some short period of time, be
introduced to our happy circle. Adrian, Idris and I, were established
in Windsor Castle; Lord Raymond and my sister, inhabited a house which
the former had built on the borders of the Great Park, near Perdita’s
cottage, as was still named the low-roofed abode, where we two, poor
even in hope, had each received the assurance of our felicity. We had
our separate occupations and our common amusements. Sometimes we passed
whole days under the leafy covert of the forest with our books and
music. This occurred during those rare days in this country, when the
sun mounts his etherial throne in unclouded majesty, and the windless
atmosphere is as a bath of pellucid and grateful water, wrapping the
senses in tranquillity. When the clouds veiled the sky, and the wind
scattered them there and here, rending their woof, and strewing its
fragments through the aerial plains—then we rode out, and sought new
spots of beauty and repose. When the frequent rains shut us within
doors, evening recreation followed morning study, ushered in by music
and song. Idris had a natural musical talent; and her voice, which had
been carefully cultivated, was full and sweet. Raymond and I made a
part of the concert, and Adrian and Perdita were devout listeners. Then
we were as gay as summer insects, playful as children; we ever met one
another with smiles, and read content and joy in each other’s
countenances. Our prime festivals were held in Perdita’s cottage; nor
were we ever weary of talking of the past or dreaming of the future.
Jealousy and disquiet were unknown among us; nor did a fear or hope of
change ever disturb our tranquillity. Others said, We might be happy—we
said—We are.

When any separation took place between us, it generally so happened,
that Idris and Perdita would ramble away together, and we remained to
discuss the affairs of nations, and the philosophy of life. The very
difference of our dispositions gave zest to these conversations. Adrian
had the superiority in learning and eloquence; but Raymond possessed a
quick penetration, and a practical knowledge of life, which usually
displayed itself in opposition to Adrian, and thus kept up the ball of
discussion. At other times we made excursions of many days’ duration,
and crossed the country to visit any spot noted for beauty or
historical association. Sometimes we went up to London, and entered
into the amusements of the busy throng; sometimes our retreat was
invaded by visitors from among them. This change made us only the more
sensible to the delights of the intimate intercourse of our own circle,
the tranquillity of our divine forest, and our happy evenings in the
halls of our beloved Castle.

The disposition of Idris was peculiarly frank, soft, and affectionate.
Her temper was unalterably sweet; and although firm and resolute on any
point that touched her heart, she was yielding to those she loved. The
nature of Perdita was less perfect; but tenderness and happiness
improved her temper, and softened her natural reserve. Her
understanding was clear and comprehensive, her imagination vivid; she
was sincere, generous, and reasonable. Adrian, the matchless brother of
my soul, the sensitive and excellent Adrian, loving all, and beloved by
all, yet seemed destined not to find the half of himself, which was to
complete his happiness. He often left us, and wandered by himself in
the woods, or sailed in his little skiff, his books his only
companions. He was often the gayest of our party, at the same time that
he was the only one visited by fits of despondency; his slender frame
seemed overcharged with the weight of life, and his soul appeared
rather to inhabit his body than unite with it. I was hardly more
devoted to my Idris than to her brother, and she loved him as her
teacher, her friend, the benefactor who had secured to her the
fulfilment of her dearest wishes. Raymond, the ambitious, restless
Raymond, reposed midway on the great high-road of life, and was content
to give up all his schemes of sovereignty and fame, to make one of us,
the flowers of the field. His kingdom was the heart of Perdita, his
subjects her thoughts; by her he was loved, respected as a superior
being, obeyed, waited on. No office, no devotion, no watching was
irksome to her, as it regarded him. She would sit apart from us and
watch him; she would weep for joy to think that he was hers. She
erected a temple for him in the depth of her being, and each faculty
was a priestess vowed to his service. Sometimes she might be wayward
and capricious; but her repentance was bitter, her return entire, and
even this inequality of temper suited him who was not formed by nature
to float idly down the stream of life.

During the first year of their marriage, Perdita presented Raymond with
a lovely girl. It was curious to trace in this miniature model the very
traits of its father. The same half-disdainful lips and smile of
triumph, the same intelligent eyes, the same brow and chestnut hair;
her very hands and taper fingers resembled his. How very dear she was
to Perdita! In progress of time, I also became a father, and our little
darlings, our playthings and delights, called forth a thousand new and
delicious feelings.

Years passed thus,—even years. Each month brought forth its successor,
each year one like to that gone by; truly, our lives were a living
comment on that beautiful sentiment of Plutarch, that “our souls have a
natural inclination to love, being born as much to love, as to feel, to
reason, to understand and remember.” We talked of change and active
pursuits, but still remained at Windsor, incapable of violating the
charm that attached us to our secluded life.

Pareamo aver qui tutto il ben raccolto
Che fra mortali in più parte si rimembra.


Now also that our children gave us occupation, we found excuses for our
idleness, in the idea of bringing them up to a more splendid career. At
length our tranquillity was disturbed, and the course of events, which
for five years had flowed on in hushing tranquillity, was broken by
breakers and obstacles, that woke us from our pleasant dream.

A new Lord Protector of England was to be chosen; and, at Raymond’s
request, we removed to London, to witness, and even take a part in the
election. If Raymond had been united to Idris, this post had been his
stepping-stone to higher dignity; and his desire for power and fame had
been crowned with fullest measure. He had exchanged a sceptre for a
lute, a kingdom for Perdita.

Did he think of this as we journeyed up to town? I watched him, but
could make but little of him. He was particularly gay, playing with his
child, and turning to sport every word that was uttered. Perhaps he did
this because he saw a cloud upon Perdita’s brow. She tried to rouse
herself, but her eyes every now and then filled with tears, and she
looked wistfully on Raymond and her girl, as if fearful that some evil
would betide them. And so she felt. A presentiment of ill hung over
her. She leaned from the window looking on the forest, and the turrets
of the Castle, and as these became hid by intervening objects, she
passionately exclaimed—“Scenes of happiness! scenes sacred to devoted
love, when shall I see you again! and when I see ye, shall I be still
the beloved and joyous Perdita, or shall I, heart-broken and lost,
wander among your groves, the ghost of what I am!”

“Why, silly one,” cried Raymond, “what is your little head pondering
upon, that of a sudden you have become so sublimely dismal? Cheer up,
or I shall make you over to Idris, and call Adrian into the carriage,
who, I see by his gesture, sympathizes with my good spirits.”

Adrian was on horseback; he rode up to the carriage, and his gaiety, in
addition to that of Raymond, dispelled my sister’s melancholy. We
entered London in the evening, and went to our several abodes near Hyde
Park.

The following morning Lord Raymond visited me early. “I come to you,”
he said, “only half assured that you will assist me in my project, but
resolved to go through with it, whether you concur with me or not.
Promise me secrecy however; for if you will not contribute to my
success, at least you must not baffle me.”

“Well, I promise. And now—-”

“And now, my dear fellow, for what are we come to London? To be present
at the election of a Protector, and to give our yea or nay for his
shuffling Grace of——? or for that noisy Ryland? Do you believe, Verney,
that I brought you to town for that? No, we will have a Protector of
our own. We will set up a candidate, and ensure his success. We will
nominate Adrian, and do our best to bestow on him the power to which he
is entitled by his birth, and which he merits through his virtues.

“Do not answer; I know all your objections, and will reply to them in
order. First, Whether he will or will not consent to become a great
man? Leave the task of persuasion on that point to me; I do not ask you
to assist me there. Secondly, Whether he ought to exchange his
employment of plucking blackberries, and nursing wounded partridges in
the forest, for the command of a nation? My dear Lionel, we are married
men, and find employment sufficient in amusing our wives, and dancing
our children. But Adrian is alone, wifeless, childless, unoccupied. I
have long observed him. He pines for want of some interest in life. His
heart, exhausted by his early sufferings, reposes like a new-healed
limb, and shrinks from all excitement. But his understanding, his
charity, his virtues, want a field for exercise and display; and we
will procure it for him. Besides, is it not a shame, that the genius of
Adrian should fade from the earth like a flower in an untrod
mountain-path, fruitless? Do you think Nature composed his surpassing
machine for no purpose? Believe me, he was destined to be the author of
infinite good to his native England. Has she not bestowed on him every
gift in prodigality?—birth, wealth, talent, goodness? Does not every
one love and admire him? and does he not delight singly in such efforts
as manifest his love to all? Come, I see that you are already
persuaded, and will second me when I propose him to-night in
parliament.”

“You have got up all your arguments in excellent order,” I replied;
“and, if Adrian consent, they are unanswerable. One only condition I
would make, —that you do nothing without his concurrence.”

“I believe you are in the right,” said Raymond; “although I had thought
at first to arrange the affair differently. Be it so. I will go
instantly to Adrian; and, if he inclines to consent, you will not
destroy my labour by persuading him to return, and turn squirrel again
in Windsor Forest. Idris, you will not act the traitor towards me?”

“Trust me,” replied she, “I will preserve a strict neutrality.”

“For my part,” said I, “I am too well convinced of the worth of our
friend, and the rich harvest of benefits that all England would reap
from his Protectorship, to deprive my countrymen of such a blessing, if
he consent to bestow it on them.”

In the evening Adrian visited us.—“Do you cabal also against me,” said
he, laughing; “and will you make common cause with Raymond, in dragging
a poor visionary from the clouds to surround him with the fire-works
and blasts of earthly grandeur, instead of heavenly rays and airs? I
thought you knew me better.”

“I do know you better,” I replied “than to think that you would be
happy in such a situation; but the good you would do to others may be
an inducement, since the time is probably arrived when you can put your
theories into practice, and you may bring about such reformation and
change, as will conduce to that perfect system of government which you
delight to portray.”

“You speak of an almost-forgotten dream,” said Adrian, his countenance
slightly clouding as he spoke; “the visions of my boyhood have long
since faded in the light of reality; I know now that I am not a man
fitted to govern nations; sufficient for me, if I keep in wholesome
rule the little kingdom of my own mortality.

“But do not you see, Lionel, the drift of our noble friend; a drift,
perhaps, unknown to himself, but apparent to me. Lord Raymond was never
born to be a drone in the hive, and to find content in our pastoral
life. He thinks, that he ought to be satisfied; he imagines, that his
present situation precludes the possibility of aggrandisement; he does
not therefore, even in his own heart, plan change for himself. But do
you not see, that, under the idea of exalting me, he is chalking out a
new path for himself; a path of action from which he has long wandered?

“Let us assist him. He, the noble, the warlike, the great in every
quality that can adorn the mind and person of man; he is fitted to be
the Protector of England. If _I_—that is, if _we_ propose him, he will
assuredly be elected, and will find, in the functions of that high
office, scope for the towering powers of his mind. Even Perdita will
rejoice. Perdita, in whom ambition was a covered fire until she married
Raymond, which event was for a time the fulfilment of her hopes;
Perdita will rejoice in the glory and advancement of her lord—and,
coyly and prettily, not be discontented with her share. In the mean
time, we, the wise of the land, will return to our Castle, and,
Cincinnatus-like, take to our usual labours, until our friend shall
require our presence and assistance here.”

The more Adrian reasoned upon this scheme, the more feasible it
appeared. His own determination never to enter into public life was
insurmountable, and the delicacy of his health was a sufficient
argument against it. The next step was to induce Raymond to confess his
secret wishes for dignity and fame. He entered while we were speaking.
The way in which Adrian had received his project for setting him up as
a candidate for the Protectorship, and his replies, had already
awakened in his mind, the view of the subject which we were now
discussing. His countenance and manner betrayed irresolution and
anxiety; but the anxiety arose from a fear that we should not
prosecute, or not succeed in our idea; and his irresolution, from a
doubt whether we should risk a defeat. A few words from us decided him,
and hope and joy sparkled in his eyes; the idea of embarking in a
career, so congenial to his early habits and cherished wishes, made him
as before energetic and bold. We discussed his chances, the merits of
the other candidates, and the dispositions of the voters.

After all we miscalculated. Raymond had lost much of his popularity,
and was deserted by his peculiar partizans. Absence from the busy stage
had caused him to be forgotten by the people; his former parliamentary
supporters were principally composed of royalists, who had been willing
to make an idol of him when he appeared as the heir of the Earldom of
Windsor; but who were indifferent to him, when he came forward with no
other attributes and distinctions than they conceived to be common to
many among themselves. Still he had many friends, admirers of his
transcendent talents; his presence in the house, his eloquence, address
and imposing beauty, were calculated to produce an electric effect.
Adrian also, notwithstanding his recluse habits and theories, so
adverse to the spirit of party, had many friends, and they were easily
induced to vote for a candidate of his selection.

The Duke of——, and Mr. Ryland, Lord Raymond’s old antagonist, were the
other candidates. The Duke was supported by all the aristocrats of the
republic, who considered him their proper representative. Ryland was
the popular candidate; when Lord Raymond was first added to the list,
his chance of success appeared small. We retired from the debate which
had followed on his nomination: we, his nominators, mortified; he
dispirited to excess. Perdita reproached us bitterly. Her expectations
had been strongly excited; she had urged nothing against our project,
on the contrary, she was evidently pleased by it; but its evident ill
success changed the current of her ideas. She felt, that, once
awakened, Raymond would never return unrepining to Windsor. His habits
were unhinged; his restless mind roused from its sleep, ambition must
now be his companion through life; and if he did not succeed in his
present attempt, she foresaw that unhappiness and cureless discontent
would follow. Perhaps her own disappointment added a sting to her
thoughts and words; she did not spare us, and our own reflections added
to our disquietude.

It was necessary to follow up our nomination, and to persuade Raymond
to present himself to the electors on the following evening. For a long
time he was obstinate. He would embark in a balloon; he would sail for
a distant quarter of the world, where his name and humiliation were
unknown. But this was useless; his attempt was registered; his purpose
published to the world; his shame could never be erased from the
memories of men. It was as well to fail at last after a struggle, as to
fly now at the beginning of his enterprise.

From the moment that he adopted this idea, he was changed. His
depression and anxiety fled; he became all life and activity. The smile
of triumph shone on his countenance; determined to pursue his object to
the uttermost, his manner and expression seem ominous of the
accomplishment of his wishes. Not so Perdita. She was frightened by his
gaiety, for she dreaded a greater revulsion at the end. If his
appearance even inspired us with hope, it only rendered the state of
her mind more painful. She feared to lose sight of him; yet she dreaded
to remark any change in the temper of his mind. She listened eagerly to
him, yet tantalized herself by giving to his words a meaning foreign to
their true interpretation, and adverse to her hopes. She dared not be
present at the contest; yet she remained at home a prey to double
solicitude. She wept over her little girl; she looked, she spoke, as if
she dreaded the occurrence of some frightful calamity. She was half mad
from the effects of uncontrollable agitation.

Lord Raymond presented himself to the house with fearless confidence
and insinuating address. After the Duke of——and Mr. Ryland had finished
their speeches, he commenced. Assuredly he had not conned his lesson;
and at first he hesitated, pausing in his ideas, and in the choice of
his expressions. By degrees he warmed; his words flowed with ease, his
language was full of vigour, and his voice of persuasion. He reverted
to his past life, his successes in Greece, his favour at home. Why
should he lose this, now that added years, prudence, and the pledge
which his marriage gave to his country, ought to encrease, rather than
diminish his claims to confidence? He spoke of the state of England;
the necessary measures to be taken to ensure its security, and confirm
its prosperity. He drew a glowing picture of its present situation. As
he spoke, every sound was hushed, every thought suspended by intense
attention. His graceful elocution enchained the senses of his hearers.
In some degree also he was fitted to reconcile all parties. His birth
pleased the aristocracy; his being the candidate recommended by Adrian,
a man intimately allied to the popular party, caused a number, who had
no great reliance either on the Duke or Mr. Ryland, to range on his
side.

The contest was keen and doubtful. Neither Adrian nor myself would have
been so anxious, if our own success had depended on our exertions; but
we had egged our friend on to the enterprise, and it became us to
ensure his triumph. Idris, who entertained the highest opinion of his
abilities, was warmly interested in the event: and my poor sister, who
dared not hope, and to whom fear was misery, was plunged into a fever
of disquietude.

Day after day passed while we discussed our projects for the evening,
and each night was occupied by debates which offered no conclusion. At
last the crisis came: the night when parliament, which had so long
delayed its choice, must decide: as the hour of twelve passed, and the
new day began, it was by virtue of the constitution dissolved, its
power extinct.

We assembled at Raymond’s house, we and our partizans. At half past
five o’clock we proceeded to the House. Idris endeavoured to calm
Perdita; but the poor girl’s agitation deprived her of all power of
self-command. She walked up and down the room,—gazed wildly when any
one entered, fancying that they might be the announcers of her doom. I
must do justice to my sweet sister: it was not for herself that she was
thus agonized. She alone knew the weight which Raymond attached to his
success. Even to us he assumed gaiety and hope, and assumed them so
well, that we did not divine the secret workings of his mind. Sometimes
a nervous trembling, a sharp dissonance of voice, and momentary fits of
absence revealed to Perdita the violence he did himself; but we, intent
on our plans, observed only his ready laugh, his joke intruded on all
occasions, the flow of his spirits which seemed incapable of ebb.
Besides, Perdita was with him in his retirement; she saw the moodiness
that succeeded to this forced hilarity; she marked his disturbed sleep,
his painful irritability—once she had seen his tears—hers had scarce
ceased to flow, since she had beheld the big drops which disappointed
pride had caused to gather in his eye, but which pride was unable to
dispel. What wonder then, that her feelings were wrought to this pitch!
I thus accounted to myself for her agitation; but this was not all, and
the sequel revealed another excuse.

One moment we seized before our departure, to take leave of our beloved
girls. I had small hope of success, and entreated Idris to watch over
my sister. As I approached the latter, she seized my hand, and drew me
into another apartment; she threw herself into my arms, and wept and
sobbed bitterly and long. I tried to soothe her; I bade her hope; I
asked what tremendous consequences would ensue even on our failure. “My
brother,” she cried, “protector of my childhood, dear, most dear
Lionel, my fate hangs by a thread. I have you all about me now—you, the
companion of my infancy; Adrian, as dear to me as if bound by the ties
of blood; Idris, the sister of my heart, and her lovely offspring.
This, O this may be the last time that you will surround me thus!”

Abruptly she stopped, and then cried: “What have I said?—foolish false
girl that I am!” She looked wildly on me, and then suddenly calming
herself, apologized for what she called her unmeaning words, saying
that she must indeed be insane, for, while Raymond lived, she must be
happy; and then, though she still wept, she suffered me tranquilly to
depart. Raymond only took her hand when he went, and looked on her
expressively; she answered by a look of intelligence and assent.

Poor girl! what she then suffered! I could never entirely forgive
Raymond for the trials he imposed on her, occasioned as they were by a
selfish feeling on his part. He had schemed, if he failed in his
present attempt, without taking leave of any of us, to embark for
Greece, and never again to revisit England. Perdita acceded to his
wishes; for his contentment was the chief object of her life, the crown
of her enjoyment; but to leave us all, her companions, the beloved
partners of her happiest years, and in the interim to conceal this
frightful determination, was a task that almost conquered her strength
of mind. She had been employed in arranging for their departure; she
had promised Raymond during this decisive evening, to take advantage of
our absence, to go one stage of the journey, and he, after his defeat
was ascertained, would slip away from us, and join her.

Although, when I was informed of this scheme, I was bitterly offended
by the small attention which Raymond paid to my sister’s feelings, I
was led by reflection to consider, that he acted under the force of
such strong excitement, as to take from him the consciousness, and,
consequently, the guilt of a fault. If he had permitted us to witness
his agitation, he would have been more under the guidance of reason;
but his struggles for the shew of composure, acted with such violence
on his nerves, as to destroy his power of self-command. I am convinced
that, at the worst, he would have returned from the seashore to take
leave of us, and to make us the partners of his council. But the task
imposed on Perdita was not the less painful. He had extorted from her a
vow of secrecy; and her part of the drama, since it was to be performed
alone, was the most agonizing that could be devised. But to return to
my narrative.

The debates had hitherto been long and loud; they had often been
protracted merely for the sake of delay. But now each seemed fearful
lest the fatal moment should pass, while the choice was yet undecided.
Unwonted silence reigned in the house, the members spoke in whispers,
and the ordinary business was transacted with celerity and quietness.
During the first stage of the election, the Duke of——had been thrown
out; the question therefore lay between Lord Raymond and Mr. Ryland.
The latter had felt secure of victory, until the appearance of Raymond;
and, since his name had been inserted as a candidate, he had canvassed
with eagerness. He had appeared each evening, impatience and anger
marked in his looks, scowling on us from the opposite side of St.
Stephen’s, as if his mere frown would cast eclipse on our hopes.

Every thing in the English constitution had been regulated for the
better preservation of peace. On the last day, two candidates only were
allowed to remain; and to obviate, if possible, the last struggle
between these, a bribe was offered to him who should voluntarily resign
his pretensions; a place of great emolument and honour was given him,
and his success facilitated at a future election. Strange to say
however, no instance had yet occurred, where either candidate had had
recourse to this expedient; in consequence the law had become obsolete,
nor had been referred to by any of us in our discussions. To our
extreme surprise, when it was moved that we should resolve ourselves
into a committee for the election of the Lord Protector, the member who
had nominated Ryland, rose and informed us that this candidate had
resigned his pretensions. His information was at first received with
silence; a confused murmur succeeded; and, when the chairman declared
Lord Raymond duly chosen, it amounted to a shout of applause and
victory. It seemed as if, far from any dread of defeat even if Mr.
Ryland had not resigned, every voice would have been united in favour
of our candidate. In fact, now that the idea of contest was dismissed,
all hearts returned to their former respect and admiration of our
accomplished friend. Each felt, that England had never seen a Protector
so capable of fulfilling the arduous duties of that high office. One
voice made of many voices, resounded through the chamber; it syllabled
the name of Raymond.

He entered. I was on one of the highest seats, and saw him walk up the
passage to the table of the speaker. The native modesty of his
disposition conquered the joy of his triumph. He looked round timidly;
a mist seemed before his eyes. Adrian, who was beside me, hastened to
him, and jumping down the benches, was at his side in a moment. His
appearance re-animated our friend; and, when he came to speak and act,
his hesitation vanished, and he shone out supreme in majesty and
victory. The former Protector tendered him the oaths, and presented him
with the insignia of office, performing the ceremonies of installation.
The house then dissolved. The chief members of the state crowded round
the new magistrate, and conducted him to the palace of government.
Adrian suddenly vanished; and, by the time that Raymond’s supporters
were reduced to our intimate friends merely, returned leading Idris to
congratulate her friend on his success.

But where was Perdita? In securing solicitously an unobserved retreat
in case of failure, Raymond had forgotten to arrange the mode by which
she was to hear of his success; and she had been too much agitated to
revert to this circumstance. When Idris entered, so far had Raymond
forgotten himself, that he asked for my sister; one word, which told of
her mysterious disappearance, recalled him. Adrian it is true had
already gone to seek the fugitive, imagining that her tameless anxiety
had led her to the purlieus of the House, and that some sinister event
detained her. But Raymond, without explaining himself, suddenly quitted
us, and in another moment we heard him gallop down the street, in spite
of the wind and rain that scattered tempest over the earth. We did not
know how far he had to go, and soon separated, supposing that in a
short time he would return to the palace with Perdita, and that they
would not be sorry to find themselves alone.

Perdita had arrived with her child at Dartford, weeping and
inconsolable. She directed everything to be prepared for the
continuance of their journey, and placing her lovely sleeping charge on
a bed, passed several hours in acute suffering. Sometimes she observed
the war of elements, thinking that they also declared against her, and
listened to the pattering of the rain in gloomy despair. Sometimes she
hung over her child, tracing her resemblance to the father, and fearful
lest in after life she should display the same passions and
uncontrollable impulses, that rendered him unhappy. Again, with a gush
of pride and delight, she marked in the features of her little girl,
the same smile of beauty that often irradiated Raymond’s countenance.
The sight of it soothed her. She thought of the treasure she possessed
in the affections of her lord; of his accomplishments, surpassing those
of his contemporaries, his genius, his devotion to her.—Soon she
thought, that all she possessed in the world, except him, might well be
spared, nay, given with delight, a propitiatory offering, to secure the
supreme good she retained in him. Soon she imagined, that fate demanded
this sacrifice from her, as a mark she was devoted to Raymond, and that
it must be made with cheerfulness. She figured to herself their life in
the Greek isle he had selected for their retreat; her task of soothing
him; her cares for the beauteous Clara, her rides in his company, her
dedication of herself to his consolation. The picture then presented
itself to her in such glowing colours, that she feared the reverse, and
a life of magnificence and power in London; where Raymond would no
longer be hers only, nor she the sole source of happiness to him. So
far as she merely was concerned, she began to hope for defeat; and it
was only on his account that her feelings vacillated, as she heard him
gallop into the court-yard of the inn. That he should come to her
alone, wetted by the storm, careless of every thing except speed, what
else could it mean, than that, vanquished and solitary, they were to
take their way from native England, the scene of shame, and hide
themselves in the myrtle groves of the Grecian isles?

In a moment she was in his arms. The knowledge of his success had
become so much a part of himself, that he forgot that it was necessary
to impart it to his companion. She only felt in his embrace a dear
assurance that while he possessed her, he would not despair. “This is
kind,” she cried; “this is noble, my own beloved! O fear not disgrace
or lowly fortune, while you have your Perdita; fear not sorrow, while
our child lives and smiles. Let us go even where you will; the love
that accompanies us will prevent our regrets.”

Locked in his embrace, she spoke thus, and cast back her head, seeking
an assent to her words in his eyes—they were sparkling with ineffable
delight. “Why, my little Lady Protectress,” said he, playfully, “what
is this you say? And what pretty scheme have you woven of exile and
obscurity, while a brighter web, a gold-enwoven tissue, is that which,
in truth, you ought to contemplate?”

He kissed her brow—but the wayward girl, half sorry at his triumph,
agitated by swift change of thought, hid her face in his bosom and
wept. He comforted her; he instilled into her his own hopes and
desires; and soon her countenance beamed with sympathy. How very happy
were they that night! How full even to bursting was their sense of joy!




CHAPTER VII.


Having seen our friend properly installed in his new office, we turned
our eyes towards Windsor. The nearness of this place to London was
such, as to take away the idea of painful separation, when we quitted
Raymond and Perdita. We took leave of them in the Protectoral Palace.
It was pretty enough to see my sister enter as it were into the spirit
of the drama, and endeavour to fill her station with becoming dignity.
Her internal pride and humility of manner were now more than ever at
war. Her timidity was not artificial, but arose from that fear of not
being properly appreciated, that slight estimation of the neglect of
the world, which also characterized Raymond. But then Perdita thought
more constantly of others than he; and part of her bashfulness arose
from a wish to take from those around her a sense of inferiority; a
feeling which never crossed her mind. From the circumstances of her
birth and education, Idris would have been better fitted for the
formulae of ceremony; but the very ease which accompanied such actions
with her, arising from habit, rendered them tedious; while, with every
drawback, Perdita evidently enjoyed her situation. She was too full of
new ideas to feel much pain when we departed; she took an affectionate
leave of us, and promised to visit us soon; but she did not regret the
circumstances that caused our separation. The spirits of Raymond were
unbounded; he did not know what to do with his new got power; his head
was full of plans; he had as yet decided on none— but he promised
himself, his friends, and the world, that the aera of his Protectorship
should be signalized by some act of surpassing glory. Thus, we talked
of them, and moralized, as with diminished numbers we returned to
Windsor Castle. We felt extreme delight at our escape from political
turmoil, and sought our solitude with redoubled zest. We did not want
for occupation; but my eager disposition was now turned to the field of
intellectual exertion only; and hard study I found to be an excellent
medicine to allay a fever of spirit with which in indolence, I should
doubtless have been assailed. Perdita had permitted us to take Clara
back with us to Windsor; and she and my two lovely infants were
perpetual sources of interest and amusement.

The only circumstance that disturbed our peace, was the health of
Adrian. It evidently declined, without any symptom which could lead us
to suspect his disease, unless indeed his brightened eyes, animated
look, and flustering cheeks, made us dread consumption; but he was
without pain or fear. He betook himself to books with ardour, and
reposed from study in the society he best loved, that of his sister and
myself. Sometimes he went up to London to visit Raymond, and watch the
progress of events. Clara often accompanied him in these excursions;
partly that she might see her parents, partly because Adrian delighted
in the prattle, and intelligent looks of this lovely child.

Meanwhile all went on well in London. The new elections were finished;
parliament met, and Raymond was occupied in a thousand beneficial
schemes. Canals, aqueducts, bridges, stately buildings, and various
edifices for public utility, were entered upon; he was continually
surrounded by projectors and projects, which were to render England one
scene of fertility and magnificence; the state of poverty was to be
abolished; men were to be transported from place to place almost with
the same facility as the Princes Houssain, Ali, and Ahmed, in the
Arabian Nights. The physical state of man would soon not yield to the
beatitude of angels; disease was to be banished; labour lightened of
its heaviest burden. Nor did this seem extravagant. The arts of life,
and the discoveries of science had augmented in a ratio which left all
calculation behind; food sprung up, so to say, spontaneously—machines
existed to supply with facility every want of the population. An evil
direction still survived; and men were not happy, not because they
could not, but because they would not rouse themselves to vanquish
self-raised obstacles. Raymond was to inspire them with his beneficial
will, and the mechanism of society, once systematised according to
faultless rules, would never again swerve into disorder. For these
hopes he abandoned his long-cherished ambition of being enregistered in
the annals of nations as a successful warrior; laying aside his sword,
peace and its enduring glories became his aim—the title he coveted was
that of the benefactor of his country.

Among other works of art in which he was engaged, he had projected the
erection of a national gallery for statues and pictures. He possessed
many himself, which he designed to present to the Republic; and, as the
edifice was to be the great ornament of his Protectorship, he was very
fastidious in his choice of the plan on which it would be built.
Hundreds were brought to him and rejected. He sent even to Italy and
Greece for drawings; but, as the design was to be characterized by
originality as well as by perfect beauty, his endeavours were for a
time without avail. At length a drawing came, with an address where
communications might be sent, and no artist’s name affixed. The design
was new and elegant, but faulty; so faulty, that although drawn with
the hand and eye of taste, it was evidently the work of one who was not
an architect. Raymond contemplated it with delight; the more he gazed,
the more pleased he was; and yet the errors multiplied under
inspection. He wrote to the address given, desiring to see the
draughtsman, that such alterations might be made, as should be
suggested in a consultation between him and the original conceiver.

A Greek came. A middle-aged man, with some intelligence of manner, but
with so common-place a physiognomy, that Raymond could scarcely believe
that he was the designer. He acknowledged that he was not an architect;
but the idea of the building had struck him, though he had sent it
without the smallest hope of its being accepted. He was a man of few
words. Raymond questioned him; but his reserved answers soon made him
turn from the man to the drawing. He pointed out the errors, and the
alterations that he wished to be made; he offered the Greek a pencil
that he might correct the sketch on the spot; this was refused by his
visitor, who said that he perfectly understood, and would work at it at
home. At length Raymond suffered him to depart.

The next day he returned. The design had been re-drawn; but many
defects still remained, and several of the instructions given had been
misunderstood. “Come,” said Raymond, “I yielded to you yesterday, now
comply with my request—take the pencil.”

The Greek took it, but he handled it in no artist-like way; at length
he said: “I must confess to you, my Lord, that I did not make this
drawing. It is impossible for you to see the real designer; your
instructions must pass through me. Condescend therefore to have
patience with my ignorance, and to explain your wishes to me; in time I
am certain that you will be satisfied.”

Raymond questioned vainly; the mysterious Greek would say no more.
Would an architect be permitted to see the artist? This also was
refused. Raymond repeated his instructions, and the visitor retired.
Our friend resolved however not to be foiled in his wish. He suspected,
that unaccustomed poverty was the cause of the mystery, and that the
artist was unwilling to be seen in the garb and abode of want. Raymond
was only the more excited by this consideration to discover him;
impelled by the interest he took in obscure talent, he therefore
ordered a person skilled in such matters, to follow the Greek the next
time he came, and observe the house in which he should enter. His
emissary obeyed, and brought the desired intelligence. He had traced
the man to one of the most penurious streets in the metropolis. Raymond
did not wonder, that, thus situated, the artist had shrunk from notice,
but he did not for this alter his resolve.

On the same evening, he went alone to the house named to him. Poverty,
dirt, and squalid misery characterized its appearance. Alas! thought
Raymond, I have much to do before England becomes a Paradise. He
knocked; the door was opened by a string from above—the broken,
wretched staircase was immediately before him, but no person appeared;
he knocked again, vainly—and then, impatient of further delay, he
ascended the dark, creaking stairs. His main wish, more particularly
now that he witnessed the abject dwelling of the artist, was to relieve
one, possessed of talent, but depressed by want. He pictured to himself
a youth, whose eyes sparkled with genius, whose person was attenuated
by famine. He half feared to displease him; but he trusted that his
generous kindness would be administered so delicately, as not to excite
repulse. What human heart is shut to kindness? and though poverty, in
its excess, might render the sufferer unapt to submit to the supposed
degradation of a benefit, the zeal of the benefactor must at last relax
him into thankfulness. These thoughts encouraged Raymond, as he stood
at the door of the highest room of the house. After trying vainly to
enter the other apartments, he perceived just within the threshold of
this one, a pair of small Turkish slippers; the door was ajar, but all
was silent within. It was probable that the inmate was absent, but
secure that he had found the right person, our adventurous Protector
was tempted to enter, to leave a purse on the table, and silently
depart. In pursuance of this idea, he pushed open the door gently—but
the room was inhabited.

Raymond had never visited the dwellings of want, and the scene that now
presented itself struck him to the heart. The floor was sunk in many
places; the walls ragged and bare—the ceiling weather-stained—a
tattered bed stood in the corner; there were but two chairs in the
room, and a rough broken table, on which was a light in a tin
candlestick;—yet in the midst of such drear and heart sickening
poverty, there was an air of order and cleanliness that surprised him.
The thought was fleeting; for his attention was instantly drawn towards
the inhabitant of this wretched abode. It was a female. She sat at the
table; one small hand shaded her eyes from the candle; the other held a
pencil; her looks were fixed on a drawing before her, which Raymond
recognized as the design presented to him. Her whole appearance
awakened his deepest interest. Her dark hair was braided and twined in
thick knots like the head-dress of a Grecian statue; her garb was mean,
but her attitude might have been selected as a model of grace. Raymond
had a confused remembrance that he had seen such a form before; he
walked across the room; she did not raise her eyes, merely asking in
Romaic, who is there? “A friend,” replied Raymond in the same dialect.
She looked up wondering, and he saw that it was Evadne Zaimi. Evadne,
once the idol of Adrian’s affections; and who, for the sake of her
present visitor, had disdained the noble youth, and then, neglected by
him she loved, with crushed hopes and a stinging sense of misery, had
returned to her native Greece. What revolution of fortune could have
brought her to England, and housed her thus?

Raymond recognized her; and his manner changed from polite beneficence
to the warmest protestations of kindness and sympathy. The sight of
her, in her present situation, passed like an arrow into his soul. He
sat by her, he took her hand, and said a thousand things which breathed
the deepest spirit of compassion and affection. Evadne did not answer;
her large dark eyes were cast down, at length a tear glimmered on the
lashes. “Thus,” she cried, “kindness can do, what no want, no misery
ever effected; I weep.” She shed indeed many tears; her head sunk
unconsciously on the shoulder of Raymond; he held her hand: he kissed
her sunken tear-stained cheek. He told her, that her sufferings were
now over: no one possessed the art of consoling like Raymond; he did
not reason or declaim, but his look shone with sympathy; he brought
pleasant images before the sufferer; his caresses excited no distrust,
for they arose purely from the feeling which leads a mother to kiss her
wounded child; a desire to demonstrate in every possible way the truth
of his feelings, and the keenness of his wish to pour balm into the
lacerated mind of the unfortunate. As Evadne regained her composure,
his manner became even gay; he sported with the idea of her poverty.
Something told him that it was not its real evils that lay heavily at
her heart, but the debasement and disgrace attendant on it; as he
talked, he divested it of these; sometimes speaking of her fortitude
with energetic praise; then, alluding to her past state, he called her
his Princess in disguise. He made her warm offers of service; she was
too much occupied by more engrossing thoughts, either to accept or
reject them; at length he left her, making a promise to repeat his
visit the next day. He returned home, full of mingled feelings, of pain
excited by Evadne’s wretchedness, and pleasure at the prospect of
relieving it. Some motive for which he did not account, even to
himself, prevented him from relating his adventure to Perdita.

The next day he threw such disguise over his person as a cloak
afforded, and revisited Evadne. As he went, he bought a basket of
costly fruits, such as were natives of her own country, and throwing
over these various beautiful flowers, bore it himself to the miserable
garret of his friend. “Behold,” cried he, as he entered, “what bird’s
food I have brought for my sparrow on the house-top.”

Evadne now related the tale of her misfortunes. Her father, though of
high rank, had in the end dissipated his fortune, and even destroyed
his reputation and influence through a course of dissolute indulgence.
His health was impaired beyond hope of cure; and it became his earnest
wish, before he died, to preserve his daughter from the poverty which
would be the portion of her orphan state. He therefore accepted for
her, and persuaded her to accede to, a proposal of marriage, from a
wealthy Greek merchant settled at Constantinople. She quitted her
native Greece; her father died; by degrees she was cut off from all the
companions and ties of her youth.

The war, which about a year before the present time had broken out
between Greece and Turkey, brought about many reverses of fortune. Her
husband became bankrupt, and then in a tumult and threatened massacre
on the part of the Turks, they were obliged to fly at midnight, and
reached in an open boat an English vessel under sail, which brought
them immediately to this island. The few jewels they had saved,
supported them awhile. The whole strength of Evadne’s mind was exerted
to support the failing spirits of her husband. Loss of property,
hopelessness as to his future prospects, the inoccupation to which
poverty condemned him, combined to reduce him to a state bordering on
insanity. Five months after their arrival in England, he committed
suicide.

“You will ask me,” continued Evadne, “what I have done since; why I
have not applied for succour to the rich Greeks resident here; why I
have not returned to my native country? My answer to these questions
must needs appear to you unsatisfactory, yet they have sufficed to lead
me on, day after day, enduring every wretchedness, rather than by such
means to seek relief. Shall the daughter of the noble, though prodigal
Zaimi, appear a beggar before her compeers or inferiors—superiors she
had none. Shall I bow my head before them, and with servile gesture
sell my nobility for life? Had I a child, or any tie to bind me to
existence, I might descend to this—but, as it is—the world has been to
me a harsh step-mother; fain would I leave the abode she seems to
grudge, and in the grave forget my pride, my struggles, my despair. The
time will soon come; grief and famine have already sapped the
foundations of my being; a very short time, and I shall have passed
away; unstained by the crime of self-destruction, unstung by the memory
of degradation, my spirit will throw aside the miserable coil, and find
such recompense as fortitude and resignation may deserve. This may seem
madness to you, yet you also have pride and resolution; do not then
wonder that my pride is tameless, my resolution unalterable.”

Having thus finished her tale, and given such an account as she deemed
fit, of the motives of her abstaining from all endeavour to obtain aid
from her countrymen, Evadne paused; yet she seemed to have more to say,
to which she was unable to give words. In the mean time Raymond was
eloquent. His desire of restoring his lovely friend to her rank in
society, and to her lost prosperity, animated him, and he poured forth
with energy, all his wishes and intentions on that subject. But he was
checked; Evadne exacted a promise, that he should conceal from all her
friends her existence in England. “The relatives of the Earl of
Windsor,” said she haughtily, “doubtless think that I injured him;
perhaps the Earl himself would be the first to acquit me, but probably
I do not deserve acquittal. I acted then, as I ever must, from impulse.
This abode of penury may at least prove the disinterestedness of my
conduct. No matter: I do not wish to plead my cause before any of them,
not even before your Lordship, had you not first discovered me. The
tenor of my actions will prove that I had rather die, than be a mark
for scorn—behold the proud Evadne in her tatters! look on the
beggar-princess! There is aspic venom in the thought—promise me that my
secret shall not be violated by you.”

Raymond promised; but then a new discussion ensued. Evadne required
another engagement on his part, that he would not without her
concurrence enter into any project for her benefit, nor himself offer
relief. “Do not degrade me in my own eyes,” she said; “poverty has long
been my nurse; hard-visaged she is, but honest. If dishonour, or what I
conceive to be dishonour, come near me, I am lost.” Raymond adduced
many arguments and fervent persuasions to overcome her feeling, but she
remained unconvinced; and, agitated by the discussion, she wildly and
passionately made a solemn vow, to fly and hide herself where he never
could discover her, where famine would soon bring death to conclude her
woes, if he persisted in his to her disgracing offers. She could
support herself, she said. And then she shewed him how, by executing
various designs and paintings, she earned a pittance for her support.
Raymond yielded for the present. He felt assured, after he had for
awhile humoured her self-will, that in the end friendship and reason
would gain the day.

But the feelings that actuated Evadne were rooted in the depths of her
being, and were such in their growth as he had no means of
understanding. Evadne loved Raymond. He was the hero of her
imagination, the image carved by love in the unchanged texture of her
heart. Seven years ago, in her youthful prime, she had become attached
to him; he had served her country against the Turks; he had in her own
land acquired that military glory peculiarly dear to the Greeks, since
they were still obliged inch by inch to fight for their security. Yet
when he returned thence, and first appeared in public life in England,
her love did not purchase his, which then vacillated between Perdita
and a crown. While he was yet undecided, she had quitted England; the
news of his marriage reached her, and her hopes, poorly nurtured
blossoms, withered and fell. The glory of life was gone for her; the
roseate halo of love, which had imbued every object with its own
colour, faded;—she was content to take life as it was, and to make the
best of leaden-coloured reality. She married; and, carrying her
restless energy of character with her into new scenes, she turned her
thoughts to ambition, and aimed at the title and power of Princess of
Wallachia; while her patriotic feelings were soothed by the idea of the
good she might do her country, when her husband should be chief of this
principality. She lived to find ambition, as unreal a delusion as love.
Her intrigues with Russia for the furtherance of her object, excited
the jealousy of the Porte, and the animosity of the Greek government.
She was considered a traitor by both, the ruin of her husband followed;
they avoided death by a timely flight, and she fell from the height of
her desires to penury in England. Much of this tale she concealed from
Raymond; nor did she confess, that repulse and denial, as to a criminal
convicted of the worst of crimes, that of bringing the scythe of
foreign despotism to cut away the new springing liberties of her
country, would have followed her application to any among the Greeks.

She knew that she was the cause of her husband’s utter ruin; and she
strung herself to bear the consequences. The reproaches which agony
extorted; or worse, cureless, uncomplaining depression, when his mind
was sunk in a torpor, not the less painful because it was silent and
moveless. She reproached herself with the crime of his death; guilt and
its punishments appeared to surround her; in vain she endeavoured to
allay remorse by the memory of her real integrity; the rest of the
world, and she among them, judged of her actions, by their
consequences. She prayed for her husband’s soul; she conjured the
Supreme to place on her head the crime of his self-destruction—she
vowed to live to expiate his fault.

In the midst of such wretchedness as must soon have destroyed her, one
thought only was matter of consolation. She lived in the same country,
breathed the same air as Raymond. His name as Protector was the burthen
of every tongue; his achievements, projects, and magnificence, the
argument of every story. Nothing is so precious to a woman’s heart as
the glory and excellence of him she loves; thus in every horror Evadne
revelled in his fame and prosperity. While her husband lived, this
feeling was regarded by her as a crime, repressed, repented of. When he
died, the tide of love resumed its ancient flow, it deluged her soul
with its tumultuous waves, and she gave herself up a prey to its
uncontrollable power.

But never, O, never, should he see her in her degraded state. Never
should he behold her fallen, as she deemed, from her pride of beauty,
the poverty-stricken inhabitant of a garret, with a name which had
become a reproach, and a weight of guilt on her soul. But though
impenetrably veiled from him, his public office permitted her to become
acquainted with all his actions, his daily course of life, even his
conversation. She allowed herself one luxury, she saw the newspapers
every day, and feasted on the praise and actions of the Protector. Not
that this indulgence was devoid of accompanying grief. Perdita’s name
was for ever joined with his; their conjugal felicity was celebrated
even by the authentic testimony of facts. They were continually
together, nor could the unfortunate Evadne read the monosyllable that
designated his name, without, at the same time, being presented with
the image of her who was the faithful companion of all his labours and
pleasures. _They_, _their Excellencies_, met her eyes in each line,
mingling an evil potion that poisoned her very blood.

It was in the newspaper that she saw the advertisement for the design
for a national gallery. Combining with taste her remembrance of the
edifices which she had seen in the east, and by an effort of genius
enduing them with unity of design, she executed the plan which had been
sent to the Protector. She triumphed in the idea of bestowing, unknown
and forgotten as she was, a benefit upon him she loved; and with
enthusiastic pride looked forward to the accomplishment of a work of
hers, which, immortalized in stone, would go down to posterity stamped
with the name of Raymond. She awaited with eagerness the return of her
messenger from the palace; she listened insatiate to his account of
each word, each look of the Protector; she felt bliss in this
communication with her beloved, although he knew not to whom he
addressed his instructions. The drawing itself became ineffably dear to
her. He had seen it, and praised it; it was again retouched by her,
each stroke of her pencil was as a chord of thrilling music, and bore
to her the idea of a temple raised to celebrate the deepest and most
unutterable emotions of her soul. These contemplations engaged her,
when the voice of Raymond first struck her ear, a voice, once heard,
never to be forgotten; she mastered her gush of feelings, and welcomed
him with quiet gentleness.

Pride and tenderness now struggled, and at length made a compromise
together. She would see Raymond, since destiny had led him to her, and
her constancy and devotion must merit his friendship. But her rights
with regard to him, and her cherished independence, should not be
injured by the idea of interest, or the intervention of the complicated
feelings attendant on pecuniary obligation, and the relative situations
of the benefactor, and benefited. Her mind was of uncommon strength;
she could subdue her sensible wants to her mental wishes, and suffer
cold, hunger and misery, rather than concede to fortune a contested
point. Alas! that in human nature such a pitch of mental discipline,
and disdainful negligence of nature itself, should not have been allied
to the extreme of moral excellence! But the resolution that permitted
her to resist the pains of privation, sprung from the too great energy
of her passions; and the concentrated self-will of which this was a
sign, was destined to destroy even the very idol, to preserve whose
respect she submitted to this detail of wretchedness.

Their intercourse continued. By degrees Evadne related to her friend
the whole of her story, the stain her name had received in Greece, the
weight of sin which had accrued to her from the death of her husband.
When Raymond offered to clear her reputation, and demonstrate to the
world her real patriotism, she declared that it was only through her
present sufferings that she hoped for any relief to the stings of
conscience; that, in her state of mind, diseased as he might think it,
the necessity of occupation was salutary medicine; she ended by
extorting a promise that for the space of one month he would refrain
from the discussion of her interests, engaging after that time to yield
in part to his wishes. She could not disguise to herself that any
change would separate her from him; now she saw him each day. His
connection with Adrian and Perdita was never mentioned; he was to her a
meteor, a companionless star, which at its appointed hour rose in her
hemisphere, whose appearance brought felicity, and which, although it
set, was never eclipsed. He came each day to her abode of penury, and
his presence transformed it to a temple redolent with sweets, radiant
with heaven’s own light; he partook of her delirium. “They built a wall
between them and the world”—Without, a thousand harpies raved, remorse
and misery, expecting the destined moment for their invasion. Within,
was the peace as of innocence, reckless blindless, deluding joy, hope,
whose still anchor rested on placid but unconstant water.

Thus, while Raymond had been wrapt in visions of power and fame, while
he looked forward to entire dominion over the elements and the mind of
man, the territory of his own heart escaped his notice; and from that
unthought of source arose the mighty torrent that overwhelmed his will,
and carried to the oblivious sea, fame, hope, and happiness.




CHAPTER VIII.


In the mean time what did Perdita?

During the first months of his Protectorate, Raymond and she had been
inseparable; each project was discussed with her, each plan approved by
her. I never beheld any one so perfectly happy as my sweet sister. Her
expressive eyes were two stars whose beams were love; hope and
light-heartedness sat on her cloudless brow. She fed even to tears of
joy on the praise and glory of her Lord; her whole existence was one
sacrifice to him, and if in the humility of her heart she felt
self-complacency, it arose from the reflection that she had won the
distinguished hero of the age, and had for years preserved him, even
after time had taken from love its usual nourishment. Her own feeling
was as entire as at its birth. Five years had failed to destroy the
dazzling unreality of passion. Most men ruthlessly destroy the sacred
veil, with which the female heart is wont to adorn the idol of its
affections. Not so Raymond; he was an enchanter, whose reign was for
ever undiminished; a king whose power never was suspended: follow him
through the details of common life, still the same charm of grace and
majesty adorned him; nor could he be despoiled of the innate
deification with which nature had invested him. Perdita grew in beauty
and excellence under his eye; I no longer recognised my reserved
abstracted sister in the fascinating and open-hearted wife of Raymond.
The genius that enlightened her countenance, was now united to an
expression of benevolence, which gave divine perfection to her beauty.

Happiness is in its highest degree the sister of goodness. Suffering
and amiability may exist together, and writers have loved to depict
their conjunction; there is a human and touching harmony in the
picture. But perfect happiness is an attribute of angels; and those who
possess it, appear angelic. Fear has been said to be the parent of
religion: even of that religion is it the generator, which leads its
votaries to sacrifice human victims at its altars; but the religion
which springs from happiness is a lovelier growth; the religion which
makes the heart breathe forth fervent thanksgiving, and causes us to
pour out the overflowings of the soul before the author of our being;
that which is the parent of the imagination and the nurse of poetry;
that which bestows benevolent intelligence on the visible mechanism of
the world, and makes earth a temple with heaven for its cope. Such
happiness, goodness, and religion inhabited the mind of Perdita.

During the five years we had spent together, a knot of happy human
beings at Windsor Castle, her blissful lot had been the frequent theme
of my sister’s conversation. From early habit, and natural affection,
she selected me in preference to Adrian or Idris, to be the partner in
her overflowings of delight; perhaps, though apparently much unlike,
some secret point of resemblance, the offspring of consanguinity,
induced this preference. Often at sunset, I have walked with her, in
the sober, enshadowed forest paths, and listened with joyful sympathy.
Security gave dignity to her passion; the certainty of a full return,
left her with no wish unfulfilled. The birth of her daughter, embryo
copy of her Raymond, filled up the measure of her content, and produced
a sacred and indissoluble tie between them. Sometimes she felt proud
that he had preferred her to the hopes of a crown. Sometimes she
remembered that she had suffered keen anguish, when he hesitated in his
choice. But this memory of past discontent only served to enhance her
present joy. What had been hardly won, was now, entirely possessed,
doubly dear. She would look at him at a distance with the same rapture,
(O, far more exuberant rapture!) that one might feel, who after the
perils of a tempest, should find himself in the desired port; she would
hasten towards him, to feel more certain in his arms, the reality of
her bliss. This warmth of affection, added to the depth of her
understanding, and the brilliancy of her imagination, made her beyond
words dear to Raymond.

If a feeling of dissatisfaction ever crossed her, it arose from the
idea that he was not perfectly happy. Desire of renown, and
presumptuous ambition, had characterized his youth. The one he had
acquired in Greece; the other he had sacrificed to love. His intellect
found sufficient field for exercise in his domestic circle, whose
members, all adorned by refinement and literature, were many of them,
like himself, distinguished by genius. Yet active life was the genuine
soil for his virtues; and he sometimes suffered tedium from the
monotonous succession of events in our retirement. Pride made him
recoil from complaint; and gratitude and affection to Perdita,
generally acted as an opiate to all desire, save that of meriting her
love. We all observed the visitation of these feelings, and none
regretted them so much as Perdita. Her life consecrated to him, was a
slight sacrifice to reward his choice, but was not that sufficient—Did
he need any gratification that she was unable to bestow? This was the
only cloud in the azure of her happiness.

His passage to power had been full of pain to both. He however attained
his wish; he filled the situation for which nature seemed to have
moulded him. His activity was fed in wholesome measure, without either
exhaustion or satiety; his taste and genius found worthy expression in
each of the modes human beings have invented to encage and manifest the
spirit of beauty; the goodness of his heart made him never weary of
conducing to the well-being of his fellow-creatures; his magnificent
spirit, and aspirations for the respect and love of mankind, now
received fruition; true, his exaltation was temporary; perhaps it were
better that it should be so. Habit would not dull his sense of the
enjoyment of power; nor struggles, disappointment and defeat await the
end of that which would expire at its maturity. He determined to
extract and condense all of glory, power, and achievement, which might
have resulted from a long reign, into the three years of his
Protectorate.

Raymond was eminently social. All that he now enjoyed would have been
devoid of pleasure to him, had it been unparticipated. But in Perdita
he possessed all that his heart could desire. Her love gave birth to
sympathy; her intelligence made her understand him at a word; her
powers of intellect enabled her to assist and guide him. He felt her
worth. During the early years of their union, the inequality of her
temper, and yet unsubdued self-will which tarnished her character, had
been a slight drawback to the fulness of his sentiment. Now that
unchanged serenity, and gentle compliance were added to her other
qualifications, his respect equalled his love. Years added to the
strictness of their union. They did not now guess at, and totter on the
pathway, divining the mode to please, hoping, yet fearing the
continuance of bliss. Five years gave a sober certainty to their
emotions, though it did not rob them of their etherial nature. It had
given them a child; but it had not detracted from the personal
attractions of my sister. Timidity, which in her had almost amounted to
awkwardness, was exchanged for a graceful decision of manner;
frankness, instead of reserve, characterized her physiognomy; and her
voice was attuned to thrilling softness. She was now three and twenty,
in the pride of womanhood, fulfilling the precious duties of wife and
mother, possessed of all her heart had ever coveted. Raymond was ten
years older; to his previous beauty, noble mien, and commanding aspect,
he now added gentlest benevolence, winning tenderness, graceful and
unwearied attention to the wishes of another.

The first secret that had existed between them was the visits of
Raymond to Evadne. He had been struck by the fortitude and beauty of
the ill-fated Greek; and, when her constant tenderness towards him
unfolded itself, he asked with astonishment, by what act of his he had
merited this passionate and unrequited love. She was for a while the
sole object of his reveries; and Perdita became aware that his thoughts
and time were bestowed on a subject unparticipated by her. My sister
was by nature destitute of the common feelings of anxious, petulant
jealousy. The treasure which she possessed in the affections of
Raymond, was more necessary to her being, than the life-blood that
animated her veins—more truly than Othello she might say,

    To be once in doubt,
Is—once to be resolved.


On the present occasion she did not suspect any alienation of
affection; but she conjectured that some circumstance connected with
his high place, had occasioned this mystery. She was startled and
pained. She began to count the long days, and months, and years which
must elapse, before he would be restored to a private station, and
unreservedly to her. She was not content that, even for a time, he
should practice concealment with her. She often repined; but her trust
in the singleness of his affection was undisturbed; and, when they were
together, unchecked by fear, she opened her heart to the fullest
delight.

Time went on. Raymond, stopping mid-way in his wild career, paused
suddenly to think of consequences. Two results presented themselves in
the view he took of the future. That his intercourse with Evadne should
continue a secret to, or that finally it should be discovered by
Perdita. The destitute condition, and highly wrought feelings of his
friend prevented him from adverting to the possibility of exiling
himself from her. In the first event he had bidden an eternal farewell
to open-hearted converse, and entire sympathy with the companion of his
life. The veil must be thicker than that invented by Turkish jealousy;
the wall higher than the unscaleable tower of Vathek, which should
conceal from her the workings of his heart, and hide from her view the
secret of his actions. This idea was intolerably painful to him.
Frankness and social feelings were the essence of Raymond’s nature;
without them his qualities became common-place; without these to spread
glory over his intercourse with Perdita, his vaunted exchange of a
throne for her love, was as weak and empty as the rainbow hues which
vanish when the sun is down. But there was no remedy. Genius, devotion,
and courage; the adornments of his mind, and the energies of his soul,
all exerted to their uttermost stretch, could not roll back one hair’s
breadth the wheel of time’s chariot; that which had been was written
with the adamantine pen of reality, on the everlasting volume of the
past; nor could agony and tears suffice to wash out one iota from the
act fulfilled.

But this was the best side of the question. What, if circumstance
should lead Perdita to suspect, and suspecting to be resolved? The
fibres of his frame became relaxed, and cold dew stood on his forehead,
at this idea. Many men may scoff at his dread; but he read the future;
and the peace of Perdita was too dear to him, her speechless agony too
certain, and too fearful, not to unman him. His course was speedily
decided upon. If the worst befell; if she learnt the truth, he would
neither stand her reproaches, or the anguish of her altered looks. He
would forsake her, England, his friends, the scenes of his youth, the
hopes of coming time, he would seek another country, and in other
scenes begin life again. Having resolved on this, he became calmer. He
endeavoured to guide with prudence the steeds of destiny through the
devious road which he had chosen, and bent all his efforts the better
to conceal what he could not alter.

The perfect confidence that subsisted between Perdita and him, rendered
every communication common between them. They opened each other’s
letters, even as, until now, the inmost fold of the heart of each was
disclosed to the other. A letter came unawares, Perdita read it. Had it
contained confirmation, she must have been annihilated. As it was,
trembling, cold, and pale, she sought Raymond. He was alone, examining
some petitions lately presented. She entered silently, sat on a sofa
opposite to him, and gazed on him with a look of such despair, that
wildest shrieks and dire moans would have been tame exhibitions of
misery, compared to the living incarnation of the thing itself
exhibited by her.

At first he did not take his eyes from the papers; when he raised them,
he was struck by the wretchedness manifest on her altered cheek; for a
moment he forgot his own acts and fears, and asked with
consternation—“Dearest girl, what is the matter; what has happened?”

“Nothing,” she replied at first; “and yet not so,” she continued,
hurrying on in her speech; “you have secrets, Raymond; where have you
been lately, whom have you seen, what do you conceal from me?—why am I
banished from your confidence? Yet this is not it—I do not intend to
entrap you with questions—one will suffice—am I completely a wretch?”

With trembling hand she gave him the paper, and sat white and
motionless looking at him while he read it. He recognised the
hand-writing of Evadne, and the colour mounted in his cheeks. With
lightning-speed he conceived the contents of the letter; all was now
cast on one die; falsehood and artifice were trifles in comparison with
the impending ruin. He would either entirely dispel Perdita’s
suspicions, or quit her for ever. “My dear girl,” he said, “I have been
to blame; but you must pardon me. I was in the wrong to commence a
system of concealment; but I did it for the sake of sparing you pain;
and each day has rendered it more difficult for me to alter my plan.
Besides, I was instigated by delicacy towards the unhappy writer of
these few lines.”

Perdita gasped: “Well,” she cried, “well, go on!”

“That is all—this paper tells all. I am placed in the most difficult
circumstances. I have done my best, though perhaps I have done wrong.
My love for you is inviolate.”

Perdita shook her head doubtingly: “It cannot be,” she cried, “I know
that it is not. You would deceive me, but I will not be deceived. I
have lost you, myself, my life!”

“Do you not believe me?” said Raymond haughtily.

“To believe you,” she exclaimed, “I would give up all, and expire with
joy, so that in death I could feel that you were true—but that cannot
be!”

“Perdita,” continued Raymond, “you do not see the precipice on which
you stand. You may believe that I did not enter on my present line of
conduct without reluctance and pain. I knew that it was possible that
your suspicions might be excited; but I trusted that my simple word
would cause them to disappear. I built my hope on your confidence. Do
you think that I will be questioned, and my replies disdainfully set
aside? Do you think that I will be suspected, perhaps watched,
cross-questioned, and disbelieved? I am not yet fallen so low; my
honour is not yet so tarnished. You have loved me; I adored you. But
all human sentiments come to an end. Let our affection expire—but let
it not be exchanged for distrust and recrimination. Heretofore we have
been friends—lovers—let us not become enemies, mutual spies. I cannot
live the object of suspicion—you cannot believe me—let us part!”

“Exactly so,” cried Perdita, “I knew that it would come to this! Are we
not already parted? Does not a stream, boundless as ocean, deep as
vacuum, yawn between us?”

Raymond rose, his voice was broken, his features convulsed, his manner
calm as the earthquake-cradling atmosphere, he replied: “I am rejoiced
that you take my decision so philosophically. Doubtless you will play
the part of the injured wife to admiration. Sometimes you may be stung
with the feeling that you have wronged me, but the condolence of your
relatives, the pity of the world, the complacency which the
consciousness of your own immaculate innocence will bestow, will be
excellent balm;—me you will never see more!”

Raymond moved towards the door. He forgot that each word he spoke was
false. He personated his assumption of innocence even to
self-deception. Have not actors wept, as they pourtrayed imagined
passion? A more intense feeling of the reality of fiction possessed
Raymond. He spoke with pride; he felt injured. Perdita looked up; she
saw his angry glance; his hand was on the lock of the door. She started
up, she threw herself on his neck, she gasped and sobbed; he took her
hand, and leading her to the sofa, sat down near her. Her head fell on
his shoulder, she trembled, alternate changes of fire and ice ran
through her limbs: observing her emotion he spoke with softened
accents:

“The blow is given. I will not part from you in anger;—I owe you too
much. I owe you six years of unalloyed happiness. But they are passed.
I will not live the mark of suspicion, the object of jealousy. I love
you too well. In an eternal separation only can either of us hope for
dignity and propriety of action. We shall not then be degraded from our
true characters. Faith and devotion have hitherto been the essence of
our intercourse;—these lost, let us not cling to the seedless husk of
life, the unkernelled shell. You have your child, your brother, Idris,
Adrian”—

“And you,” cried Perdita, “the writer of that letter.”

Uncontrollable indignation flashed from the eyes of Raymond. He knew
that this accusation at least was false. “Entertain this belief,” he
cried, “hug it to your heart—make it a pillow to your head, an opiate
for your eyes —I am content. But, by the God that made me, hell is not
more false than the word you have spoken!”

Perdita was struck by the impassioned seriousness of his asseverations.
She replied with earnestness, “I do not refuse to believe you, Raymond;
on the contrary I promise to put implicit faith in your simple word.
Only assure me that your love and faith towards me have never been
violated; and suspicion, and doubt, and jealousy will at once be
dispersed. We shall continue as we have ever done, one heart, one hope,
one life.”

“I have already assured you of my fidelity,” said Raymond with
disdainful coldness, “triple assertions will avail nothing where one is
despised. I will say no more; for I can add nothing to what I have
already said, to what you before contemptuously set aside. This
contention is unworthy of both of us; and I confess that I am weary of
replying to charges at once unfounded and unkind.”

Perdita tried to read his countenance, which he angrily averted. There
was so much of truth and nature in his resentment, that her doubts were
dispelled. Her countenance, which for years had not expressed a feeling
unallied to affection, became again radiant and satisfied. She found it
however no easy task to soften and reconcile Raymond. At first he
refused to stay to hear her. But she would not be put off; secure of
his unaltered love, she was willing to undertake any labour, use any
entreaty, to dispel his anger. She obtained an hearing, he sat in
haughty silence, but he listened. She first assured him of her
boundless confidence; of this he must be conscious, since but for that
she would not seek to detain him. She enumerated their years of
happiness; she brought before him past scenes of intimacy and
happiness; she pictured their future life, she mentioned their
child—tears unbidden now filled her eyes. She tried to disperse them,
but they refused to be checked—her utterance was choaked. She had not
wept before. Raymond could not resist these signs of distress: he felt
perhaps somewhat ashamed of the part he acted of the injured man, he
who was in truth the injurer. And then he devoutly loved Perdita; the
bend of her head, her glossy ringlets, the turn of her form were to him
subjects of deep tenderness and admiration; as she spoke, her melodious
tones entered his soul; he soon softened towards her, comforting and
caressing her, and endeavouring to cheat himself into the belief that
he had never wronged her.

Raymond staggered forth from this scene, as a man might do, who had
been just put to the torture, and looked forward to when it would be
again inflicted. He had sinned against his own honour, by affirming,
swearing to, a direct falsehood; true this he had palmed on a woman,
and it might therefore be deemed less base—by others—not by him;—for
whom had he deceived?—his own trusting, devoted, affectionate Perdita,
whose generous belief galled him doubly, when he remembered the parade
of innocence with which it had been exacted. The mind of Raymond was
not so rough cast, nor had been so rudely handled, in the circumstance
of life, as to make him proof to these considerations—on the contrary,
he was all nerve; his spirit was as a pure fire, which fades and
shrinks from every contagion of foul atmosphere: but now the contagion
had become incorporated with its essence, and the change was the more
painful. Truth and falsehood, love and hate lost their eternal
boundaries, heaven rushed in to mingle with hell; while his sensitive
mind, turned to a field for such battle, was stung to madness. He
heartily despised himself, he was angry with Perdita, and the idea of
Evadne was attended by all that was hideous and cruel. His passions,
always his masters, acquired fresh strength, from the long sleep in
which love had cradled them, the clinging weight of destiny bent him
down; he was goaded, tortured, fiercely impatient of that worst of
miseries, the sense of remorse. This troubled state yielded by degrees,
to sullen animosity, and depression of spirits. His dependants, even
his equals, if in his present post he had any, were startled to find
anger, derision, and bitterness in one, before distinguished for
suavity and benevolence of manner. He transacted public business with
distaste, and hastened from it to the solitude which was at once his
bane and relief. He mounted a fiery horse, that which had borne him
forward to victory in Greece; he fatigued himself with deadening
exercise, losing the pangs of a troubled mind in animal sensation.

He slowly recovered himself; yet, at last, as one might from the
effects of poison, he lifted his head from above the vapours of fever
and passion into the still atmosphere of calm reflection. He meditated
on what was best to be done. He was first struck by the space of time
that had elapsed, since madness, rather than any reasonable impulse,
had regulated his actions. A month had gone by, and during that time he
had not seen Evadne. Her power, which was linked to few of the enduring
emotions of his heart, had greatly decayed. He was no longer her
slave—no longer her lover: he would never see her more, and by the
completeness of his return, deserve the confidence of Perdita.

Yet, as he thus determined, fancy conjured up the miserable abode of
the Greek girl. An abode, which from noble and lofty principle, she had
refused to exchange for one of greater luxury. He thought of the
splendour of her situation and appearance when he first knew her; he
thought of her life at Constantinople, attended by every circumstance
of oriental magnificence; of her present penury, her daily task of
industry, her lorn state, her faded, famine-struck cheek. Compassion
swelled his breast; he would see her once again; he would devise some
plan for restoring her to society, and the enjoyment of her rank; their
separation would then follow, as a matter of course.

Again he thought, how during this long month, he had avoided Perdita,
flying from her as from the stings of his own conscience. But he was
awake now; all this should be remedied; and future devotion erase the
memory of this only blot on the serenity of their life. He became
cheerful, as he thought of this, and soberly and resolutely marked out
the line of conduct he would adopt. He remembered that he had promised
Perdita to be present this very evening (the 19th of October,
anniversary of his election as Protector) at a festival given in his
honour. Good augury should this festival be of the happiness of future
years. First, he would look in on Evadne; he would not stay; but he
owed her some account, some compensation for his long and unannounced
absence; and then to Perdita, to the forgotten world, to the duties of
society, the splendour of rank, the enjoyment of power.

After the scene sketched in the preceding pages, Perdita had
contemplated an entire change in the manners and conduct of Raymond.
She expected freedom of communication, and a return to those habits of
affectionate intercourse which had formed the delight of her life. But
Raymond did not join her in any of her avocations. He transacted the
business of the day apart from her; he went out, she knew not whither.
The pain inflicted by this disappointment was tormenting and keen. She
looked on it as a deceitful dream, and tried to throw off the
consciousness of it; but like the shirt of Nessus, it clung to her very
flesh, and ate with sharp agony into her vital principle. She possessed
that (though such an assertion may appear a paradox) which belongs to
few, a capacity of happiness. Her delicate organization and creative
imagination rendered her peculiarly susceptible of pleasurable emotion.
The overflowing warmth of her heart, by making love a plant of deep
root and stately growth, had attuned her whole soul to the reception of
happiness, when she found in Raymond all that could adorn love and
satisfy her imagination. But if the sentiment on which the fabric of
her existence was founded, became common place through participation,
the endless succession of attentions and graceful action snapt by
transfer, his universe of love wrested from her, happiness must depart,
and then be exchanged for its opposite. The same peculiarities of
character rendered her sorrows agonies; her fancy magnified them, her
sensibility made her for ever open to their renewed impression; love
envenomed the heart-piercing sting. There was neither submission,
patience, nor self-abandonment in her grief; she fought with it,
struggled beneath it, and rendered every pang more sharp by resistance.
Again and again the idea recurred, that he loved another. She did him
justice; she believed that he felt a tender affection for her; but give
a paltry prize to him who in some life-pending lottery has calculated
on the possession of tens of thousands, and it will disappoint him more
than a blank. The affection and amity of a Raymond might be
inestimable; but, beyond that affection, embosomed deeper than
friendship, was the indivisible treasure of love. Take the sum in its
completeness, and no arithmetic can calculate its price; take from it
the smallest portion, give it but the name of parts, separate it into
degrees and sections, and like the magician’s coin, the valueless gold
of the mine, is turned to vilest substance. There is a meaning in the
eye of love; a cadence in its voice, an irradiation in its smile, the
talisman of whose enchantments one only can possess; its spirit is
elemental, its essence single, its divinity an unit. The very heart and
soul of Raymond and Perdita had mingled, even as two mountain brooks
that join in their descent, and murmuring and sparkling flow over
shining pebbles, beside starry flowers; but let one desert its primal
course, or be dammed up by choaking obstruction, and the other shrinks
in its altered banks. Perdita was sensible of the failing of the tide
that fed her life. Unable to support the slow withering of her hopes,
she suddenly formed a plan, resolving to terminate at once the period
of misery, and to bring to an happy conclusion the late disastrous
events.

The anniversary was at hand of the exaltation of Raymond to the office
of Protector; and it was customary to celebrate this day by a splendid
festival. A variety of feelings urged Perdita to shed double
magnificence over the scene; yet, as she arrayed herself for the
evening gala, she wondered herself at the pains she took, to render
sumptuous the celebration of an event which appeared to her the
beginning of her sufferings. Woe befall the day, she thought, woe,
tears, and mourning betide the hour, that gave Raymond another hope
than love, another wish than my devotion; and thrice joyful the moment
when he shall be restored to me! God knows, I put my trust in his vows,
and believe his asserted faith—but for that, I would not seek what I am
now resolved to attain. Shall two years more be thus passed, each day
adding to our alienation, each act being another stone piled on the
barrier which separates us? No, my Raymond, my only beloved, sole
possession of Perdita! This night, this splendid assembly, these
sumptuous apartments, and this adornment of your tearful girl, are all
united to celebrate your abdication. Once for me, you relinquished the
prospect of a crown. That was in days of early love, when I could only
hold out the hope, not the assurance of happiness. Now you have the
experience of all that I can give, the heart’s devotion, taintless
love, and unhesitating subjection to you. You must choose between these
and your protectorate. This, proud noble, is your last night! Perdita
has bestowed on it all of magnificent and dazzling that your heart best
loves—but, from these gorgeous rooms, from this princely attendance,
from power and elevation, you must return with to-morrow’s sun to our
rural abode; for I would not buy an immortality of joy, by the
endurance of one more week sister to the last.

Brooding over this plan, resolved when the hour should come, to
propose, and insist upon its accomplishment, secure of his consent, the
heart of Perdita was lightened, or rather exalted. Her cheek was
flushed by the expectation of struggle; her eyes sparkled with the hope
of triumph. Having cast her fate upon a die, and feeling secure of
winning, she, whom I have named as bearing the stamp of queen of
nations on her noble brow, now rose superior to humanity, and seemed in
calm power, to arrest with her finger, the wheel of destiny. She had
never before looked so supremely lovely.

We, the Arcadian shepherds of the tale, had intended to be present at
this festivity, but Perdita wrote to entreat us not to come, or to
absent ourselves from Windsor; for she (though she did not reveal her
scheme to us) resolved the next morning to return with Raymond to our
dear circle, there to renew a course of life in which she had found
entire felicity. Late in the evening she entered the apartments
appropriated to the festival. Raymond had quitted the palace the night
before; he had promised to grace the assembly, but he had not yet
returned. Still she felt sure that he would come at last; and the wider
the breach might appear at this crisis, the more secure she was of
closing it for ever.

It was as I said, the nineteenth of October; the autumn was far
advanced and dreary. The wind howled; the half bare trees were
despoiled of the remainder of their summer ornament; the state of the
air which induced the decay of vegetation, was hostile to cheerfulness
or hope. Raymond had been exalted by the determination he had made; but
with the declining day his spirits declined. First he was to visit
Evadne, and then to hasten to the palace of the Protectorate. As he
walked through the wretched streets in the neighbourhood of the
luckless Greek’s abode, his heart smote him for the whole course of his
conduct towards her. First, his having entered into any engagement that
should permit her to remain in such a state of degradation; and then,
after a short wild dream, having left her to drear solitude, anxious
conjecture, and bitter, still—disappointed expectation. What had she
done the while, how supported his absence and neglect? Light grew dim
in these close streets, and when the well known door was opened, the
staircase was shrouded in perfect night. He groped his way up, he
entered the garret, he found Evadne stretched speechless, almost
lifeless on her wretched bed. He called for the people of the house,
but could learn nothing from them, except that they knew nothing. Her
story was plain to him, plain and distinct as the remorse and horror
that darted their fangs into him. When she found herself forsaken by
him, she lost the heart to pursue her usual avocations; pride forbade
every application to him; famine was welcomed as the kind porter to the
gates of death, within whose opening folds she should now, without sin,
quickly repose. No creature came near her, as her strength failed.

If she died, where could there be found on record a murderer, whose
cruel act might compare with his? What fiend more wanton in his
mischief, what damned soul more worthy of perdition! But he was not
reserved for this agony of self-reproach. He sent for medical
assistance; the hours passed, spun by suspense into ages; the darkness
of the long autumnal night yielded to day, before her life was secure.
He had her then removed to a more commodious dwelling, and hovered
about her, again and again to assure himself that she was safe.

In the midst of his greatest suspense and fear as to the event, he
remembered the festival given in his honour, by Perdita; in his honour
then, when misery and death were affixing indelible disgrace to his
name, honour to him whose crimes deserved a scaffold; this was the
worst mockery. Still Perdita would expect him; he wrote a few
incoherent words on a scrap of paper, testifying that he was well, and
bade the woman of the house take it to the palace, and deliver it into
the hands of the wife of the Lord Protector. The woman, who did not
know him, contemptuously asked, how he thought she should gain
admittance, particularly on a festal night, to that lady’s presence?
Raymond gave her his ring to ensure the respect of the menials. Thus,
while Perdita was entertaining her guests, and anxiously awaiting the
arrival of her lord, his ring was brought her; and she was told that a
poor woman had a note to deliver to her from its wearer.

The vanity of the old gossip was raised by her commission, which, after
all, she did not understand, since she had no suspicion, even now that
Evadne’s visitor was Lord Raymond. Perdita dreaded a fall from his
horse, or some similar accident—till the woman’s answers woke other
fears. From a feeling of cunning blindly exercised, the officious, if
not malignant messenger, did not speak of Evadne’s illness; but she
garrulously gave an account of Raymond’s frequent visits, adding to her
narration such circumstances, as, while they convinced Perdita of its
truth, exaggerated the unkindness and perfidy of Raymond. Worst of all,
his absence now from the festival, his message wholly unaccounted for,
except by the disgraceful hints of the woman, appeared the deadliest
insult. Again she looked at the ring, it was a small ruby, almost
heart-shaped, which she had herself given him. She looked at the
hand-writing, which she could not mistake, and repeated to herself the
words—“Do not, I charge you, I entreat you, permit your guests to
wonder at my absence:” the while the old crone going on with her talk,
filled her ear with a strange medley of truth and falsehood. At length
Perdita dismissed her.

The poor girl returned to the assembly, where her presence had not been
missed. She glided into a recess somewhat obscured, and leaning against
an ornamental column there placed, tried to recover herself. Her
faculties were palsied. She gazed on some flowers that stood near in a
carved vase: that morning she had arranged them, they were rare and
lovely plants; even now all aghast as she was, she observed their
brilliant colours and starry shapes.—“Divine infoliations of the spirit
of beauty,” she exclaimed, “Ye droop not, neither do ye mourn; the
despair that clasps my heart, has not spread contagion over you!—Why am
I not a partner of your insensibility, a sharer in your calm!”

She paused. “To my task,” she continued mentally, “my guests must not
perceive the reality, either as it regards him or me. I obey; they
shall not, though I die the moment they are gone. They shall behold the
antipodes of what is real—for I will appear to live—while I am—dead.”
It required all her self-command, to suppress the gush of tears
self-pity caused at this idea. After many struggles, she succeeded, and
turned to join the company.

All her efforts were now directed to the dissembling her internal
conflict. She had to play the part of a courteous hostess; to attend to
all; to shine the focus of enjoyment and grace. She had to do this,
while in deep woe she sighed for loneliness, and would gladly have
exchanged her crowded rooms for dark forest depths, or a drear,
night-enshadowed heath. But she became gay. She could not keep in the
medium, nor be, as was usual with her, placidly content. Every one
remarked her exhilaration of spirits; as all actions appear graceful in
the eye of rank, her guests surrounded her applaudingly, although there
was a sharpness in her laugh, and an abruptness in her sallies, which
might have betrayed her secret to an attentive observer. She went on,
feeling that, if she had paused for a moment, the checked waters of
misery would have deluged her soul, that her wrecked hopes would raise
their wailing voices, and that those who now echoed her mirth, and
provoked her repartees, would have shrunk in fear from her convulsive
despair. Her only consolation during the violence which she did
herself, was to watch the motions of an illuminated clock, and
internally count the moments which must elapse before she could be
alone.

At length the rooms began to thin. Mocking her own desires, she rallied
her guests on their early departure. One by one they left her—at length
she pressed the hand of her last visitor. “How cold and damp your hand
is,” said her friend; “you are over fatigued, pray hasten to rest.”
Perdita smiled faintly—her guest left her; the carriage rolling down
the street assured the final departure. Then, as if pursued by an
enemy, as if wings had been at her feet, she flew to her own apartment,
she dismissed her attendants, she locked the doors, she threw herself
wildly on the floor, she bit her lips even to blood to suppress her
shrieks, and lay long a prey to the vulture of despair, striving not to
think, while multitudinous ideas made a home of her heart; and ideas,
horrid as furies, cruel as vipers, and poured in with such swift
succession, that they seemed to jostle and wound each other, while they
worked her up to madness.

At length she rose, more composed, not less miserable. She stood before
a large mirror—she gazed on her reflected image; her light and graceful
dress, the jewels that studded her hair, and encircled her beauteous
arms and neck, her small feet shod in satin, her profuse and glossy
tresses, all were to her clouded brow and woe-begone countenance like a
gorgeous frame to a dark tempest-pourtraying picture. “Vase am I,” she
thought, “vase brimful of despair’s direst essence. Farewell, Perdita!
farewell, poor girl! never again will you see yourself thus; luxury and
wealth are no longer yours; in the excess of your poverty you may envy
the homeless beggar; most truly am I without a home! I live on a barren
desart, which, wide and interminable, brings forth neither fruit or
flower; in the midst is a solitary rock, to which thou, Perdita, art
chained, and thou seest the dreary level stretch far away.”

She threw open her window, which looked on the palace-garden. Light and
darkness were struggling together, and the orient was streaked by
roseate and golden rays. One star only trembled in the depth of the
kindling atmosphere. The morning air blowing freshly over the dewy
plants, rushed into the heated room. “All things go on,” thought
Perdita, “all things proceed, decay, and perish! When noontide has
passed, and the weary day has driven her team to their western stalls,
the fires of heaven rise from the East, moving in their accustomed
path, they ascend and descend the skiey hill. When their course is
fulfilled, the dial begins to cast westward an uncertain shadow; the
eye-lids of day are opened, and birds and flowers, the startled
vegetation, and fresh breeze awaken; the sun at length appears, and in
majestic procession climbs the capitol of heaven. All proceeds, changes
and dies, except the sense of misery in my bursting heart.

“Ay, all proceeds and changes: what wonder then, that love has journied
on to its setting, and that the lord of my life has changed? We call
the supernal lights fixed, yet they wander about yonder plain, and if I
look again where I looked an hour ago, the face of the eternal heavens
is altered. The silly moon and inconstant planets vary nightly their
erratic dance; the sun itself, sovereign of the sky, ever and anon
deserts his throne, and leaves his dominion to night and winter. Nature
grows old, and shakes in her decaying limbs,—creation has become
bankrupt! What wonder then, that eclipse and death have led to
destruction the light of thy life, O Perdita!”




CHAPTER IX.


Thus sad and disarranged were the thoughts of my poor sister, when she
became assured of the infidelity of Raymond. All her virtues and all
her defects tended to make the blow incurable. Her affection for me,
her brother, for Adrian and Idris, was subject as it were to the
reigning passion of her heart; even her maternal tenderness borrowed
half its force from the delight she had in tracing Raymond’s features
and expression in the infant’s countenance. She had been reserved and
even stern in childhood; but love had softened the asperities of her
character, and her union with Raymond had caused her talents and
affections to unfold themselves; the one betrayed, and the other lost,
she in some degree returned to her ancient disposition. The
concentrated pride of her nature, forgotten during her blissful dream,
awoke, and with its adder’s sting pierced her heart; her humility of
spirit augmented the power of the venom; she had been exalted in her
own estimation, while distinguished by his love: of what worth was she,
now that he thrust her from this preferment? She had been proud of
having won and preserved him—but another had won him from her, and her
exultation was as cold as a water quenched ember.

We, in our retirement, remained long in ignorance of her misfortune.
Soon after the festival she had sent for her child, and then she seemed
to have forgotten us. Adrian observed a change during a visit that he
afterward paid them; but he could not tell its extent, or divine the
cause. They still appeared in public together, and lived under the same
roof. Raymond was as usual courteous, though there was, on occasions,
an unbidden haughtiness, or painful abruptness in his manners, which
startled his gentle friend; his brow was not clouded but disdain sat on
his lips, and his voice was harsh. Perdita was all kindness and
attention to her lord; but she was silent, and beyond words sad. She
had grown thin and pale; and her eyes often filled with tears.
Sometimes she looked at Raymond, as if to say—That it should be so! At
others her countenance expressed—I will still do all I can to make you
happy. But Adrian read with uncertain aim the charactery of her face,
and might mistake.—Clara was always with her, and she seemed most at
ease, when, in an obscure corner, she could sit holding her child’s
hand, silent and lonely. Still Adrian was unable to guess the truth; he
entreated them to visit us at Windsor, and they promised to come during
the following month.

It was May before they arrived: the season had decked the forest trees
with leaves, and its paths with a thousand flowers. We had notice of
their intention the day before; and, early in the morning, Perdita
arrived with her daughter. Raymond would follow soon, she said; he had
been detained by business. According to Adrian’s account, I had
expected to find her sad; but, on the contrary, she appeared in the
highest spirits: true, she had grown thin, her eyes were somewhat
hollow, and her cheeks sunk, though tinged by a bright glow. She was
delighted to see us; caressed our children, praised their growth and
improvement; Clara also was pleased to meet again her young friend
Alfred; all kinds of childish games were entered into, in which Perdita
joined. She communicated her gaiety to us, and as we amused ourselves
on the Castle Terrace, it appeared that a happier, less care-worn party
could not have been assembled. “This is better, Mamma,” said Clara,
“than being in that dismal London, where you often cry, and never laugh
as you do now.”—“Silence, little foolish thing,” replied her mother,
“and remember any one that mentions London is sent to Coventry for an
hour.”

Soon after, Raymond arrived. He did not join as usual in the playful
spirit of the rest; but, entering into conversation with Adrian and
myself, by degrees we seceded from our companions, and Idris and
Perdita only remained with the children. Raymond talked of his new
buildings; of his plan for an establishment for the better education of
the poor; as usual Adrian and he entered into argument, and the time
slipped away unperceived.

We assembled again towards evening, and Perdita insisted on our having
recourse to music. She wanted, she said, to give us a specimen of her
new accomplishment; for since she had been in London, she had applied
herself to music, and sang, without much power, but with a great deal
of sweetness. We were not permitted by her to select any but
light-hearted melodies; and all the Operas of Mozart were called into
service, that we might choose the most exhilarating of his airs. Among
the other transcendant attributes of Mozart’s music, it possesses more
than any other that of appearing to come from the heart; you enter into
the passions expressed by him, and are transported with grief, joy,
anger, or confusion, as he, our soul’s master, chooses to inspire. For
some time, the spirit of hilarity was kept up; but, at length, Perdita
receded from the piano, for Raymond had joined in the trio of “_Taci
ingiusto core_,” in Don Giovanni, whose arch entreaty was softened by
him into tenderness, and thrilled her heart with memories of the
changed past; it was the same voice, the same tone, the self-same
sounds and words, which often before she had received, as the homage of
love to her—no longer was it that; and this concord of sound with its
dissonance of expression penetrated her with regret and despair. Soon
after Idris, who was at the harp, turned to that passionate and
sorrowful air in Figaro, “_Porgi, amor, qualche ristoro_,” in which the
deserted Countess laments the change of the faithless Almaviva. The
soul of tender sorrow is breathed forth in this strain; and the sweet
voice of Idris, sustained by the mournful chords of her instrument,
added to the expression of the words. During the pathetic appeal with
which it concludes, a stifled sob attracted our attention to Perdita,
the cessation of the music recalled her to herself, she hastened out of
the hall—I followed her. At first, she seemed to wish to shun me; and
then, yielding to my earnest questioning, she threw herself on my neck,
and wept aloud:—“Once more,” she cried, “once more on your friendly
breast, my beloved brother, can the lost Perdita pour forth her
sorrows. I had imposed a law of silence on myself; and for months I
have kept it. I do wrong in weeping now, and greater wrong in giving
words to my grief. I will not speak! Be it enough for you to know that
I am miserable—be it enough for you to know, that the painted veil of
life is rent, that I sit for ever shrouded in darkness and gloom, that
grief is my sister, everlasting lamentation my mate!”

I endeavoured to console her; I did not question her! but I caressed
her, assured her of my deepest affection and my intense interest in the
changes of her fortune:—“Dear words,” she cried, “expressions of love
come upon my ear, like the remembered sounds of forgotten music, that
had been dear to me. They are vain, I know; how very vain in their
attempt to soothe or comfort me. Dearest Lionel, you cannot guess what
I have suffered during these long months. I have read of mourners in
ancient days, who clothed themselves in sackcloth, scattered dust upon
their heads, ate their bread mingled with ashes, and took up their
abode on the bleak mountain tops, reproaching heaven and earth aloud
with their misfortunes. Why this is the very luxury of sorrow! thus one
might go on from day to day contriving new extravagances, revelling in
the paraphernalia of woe, wedded to all the appurtenances of despair.
Alas! I must for ever conceal the wretchedness that consumes me. I must
weave a veil of dazzling falsehood to hide my grief from vulgar eyes,
smoothe my brow, and paint my lips in deceitful smiles—even in solitude
I dare not think how lost I am, lest I become insane and rave.”

The tears and agitation of my poor sister had rendered her unfit to
return to the circle we had left—so I persuaded her to let me drive her
through the park; and, during the ride, I induced her to confide the
tale of her unhappiness to me, fancying that talking of it would
lighten the burthen, and certain that, if there were a remedy, it
should be found and secured to her.

Several weeks had elapsed since the festival of the anniversary, and
she had been unable to calm her mind, or to subdue her thoughts to any
regular train. Sometimes she reproached herself for taking too bitterly
to heart, that which many would esteem an imaginary evil; but this was
no subject for reason; and, ignorant as she was of the motives and true
conduct of Raymond, things assumed for her even a worse appearance,
than the reality warranted. He was seldom at the palace; never, but
when he was assured that his public duties would prevent his remaining
alone with Perdita. They seldom addressed each other, shunning
explanation, each fearing any communication the other might make.
Suddenly, however, the manners of Raymond changed; he appeared to
desire to find opportunities of bringing about a return to kindness and
intimacy with my sister. The tide of love towards her appeared to flow
again; he could never forget, how once he had been devoted to her,
making her the shrine and storehouse wherein to place every thought and
every sentiment. Shame seemed to hold him back; yet he evidently wished
to establish a renewal of confidence and affection. From the moment
Perdita had sufficiently recovered herself to form any plan of action,
she had laid one down, which now she prepared to follow. She received
these tokens of returning love with gentleness; she did not shun his
company; but she endeavoured to place a barrier in the way of familiar
intercourse or painful discussion, which mingled pride and shame
prevented Raymond from surmounting. He began at last to shew signs of
angry impatience, and Perdita became aware that the system she had
adopted could not continue; she must explain herself to him; she could
not summon courage to speak—she wrote thus:—

“Read this letter with patience, I entreat you. It will contain no
reproaches. Reproach is indeed an idle word: for what should I reproach
you?

“Allow me in some degree to explain my feeling; without that, we shall
both grope in the dark, mistaking one another; erring from the path
which may conduct, one of us at least, to a more eligible mode of life
than that led by either during the last few weeks.

“I loved you—I love you—neither anger nor pride dictates these lines;
but a feeling beyond, deeper, and more unalterable than either. My
affections are wounded; it is impossible to heal them:—cease then the
vain endeavour, if indeed that way your endeavours tend. Forgiveness!
Return! Idle words are these! I forgive the pain I endure; but the
trodden path cannot be retraced.

“Common affection might have been satisfied with common usages. I
believed that you read my heart, and knew its devotion, its unalienable
fidelity towards you. I never loved any but you. You came the embodied
image of my fondest dreams. The praise of men, power and high
aspirations attended your career. Love for you invested the world for
me in enchanted light; it was no longer the earth I trod—the earth,
common mother, yielding only trite and stale repetition of objects and
circumstances old and worn out. I lived in a temple glorified by
intensest sense of devotion and rapture; I walked, a consecrated being,
contemplating only your power, your excellence;

For O, you stood beside me, like my youth,
Transformed for me the real to a dream,
Cloathing the palpable and familiar
With golden exhalations of the dawn.


‘The bloom has vanished from my life’—there is no morning to this all
investing night; no rising to the set-sun of love. In those days the
rest of the world was nothing to me: all other men—I never considered
nor felt what they were; nor did I look on you as one of them.
Separated from them; exalted in my heart; sole possessor of my
affections; single object of my hopes, the best half of myself.

“Ah, Raymond, were we not happy? Did the sun shine on any, who could
enjoy its light with purer and more intense bliss? It was not—it is not
a common infidelity at which I repine. It is the disunion of an whole
which may not have parts; it is the carelessness with which you have
shaken off the mantle of election with which to me you were invested,
and have become one among the many. Dream not to alter this. Is not
love a divinity, because it is immortal? Did not I appear sanctified,
even to myself, because this love had for its temple my heart? I have
gazed on you as you slept, melted even to tears, as the idea filled my
mind, that all I possessed lay cradled in those idolized, but mortal
lineaments before me. Yet, even then, I have checked thick-coming fears
with one thought; I would not fear death, for the emotions that linked
us must be immortal.

“And now I do not fear death. I should be well pleased to close my
eyes, never more to open them again. And yet I fear it; even as I fear
all things; for in any state of being linked by the chain of memory
with this, happiness would not return—even in Paradise, I must feel
that your love was less enduring than the mortal beatings of my fragile
heart, every pulse of which knells audibly,

    The funeral note
Of love, deep buried, without resurrection.


No—no—me miserable; for love extinct there is no resurrection!

“Yet I love you. Yet, and for ever, would I contribute all I possess to
your welfare. On account of a tattling world; for the sake of my—of our
child, I would remain by you, Raymond, share your fortunes, partake
your counsel. Shall it be thus? We are no longer lovers; nor can I call
myself a friend to any; since, lost as I am, I have no thought to spare
from my own wretched, engrossing self. But it will please me to see you
each day! to listen to the public voice praising you; to keep up your
paternal love for our girl; to hear your voice; to know that I am near
you, though you are no longer mine.

“If you wish to break the chains that bind us, say the word, and it
shall be done—I will take all the blame on myself, of harshness or
unkindness, in the world’s eye.

“Yet, as I have said, I should be best pleased, at least for the
present, to live under the same roof with you. When the fever of my
young life is spent; when placid age shall tame the vulture that
devours me, friendship may come, love and hope being dead. May this be
true? Can my soul, inextricably linked to this perishable frame, become
lethargic and cold, even as this sensitive mechanism shall lose its
youthful elasticity? Then, with lack-lustre eyes, grey hairs, and
wrinkled brow, though now the words sound hollow and meaningless, then,
tottering on the grave’s extreme edge, I may be—your affectionate and
true friend,

“PERDITA.”


Raymond’s answer was brief. What indeed could he reply to her
complaints, to her griefs which she jealously paled round, keeping out
all thought of remedy. “Notwithstanding your bitter letter,” he wrote,
“for bitter I must call it, you are the chief person in my estimation,
and it is your happiness that I would principally consult. Do that
which seems best to you: and if you can receive gratification from one
mode of life in preference to another, do not let me be any obstacle. I
foresee that the plan which you mark out in your letter will not endure
long; but you are mistress of yourself, and it is my sincere wish to
contribute as far as you will permit me to your happiness.”

“Raymond has prophesied well,” said Perdita, “alas, that it should be
so! our present mode of life cannot continue long, yet I will not be
the first to propose alteration. He beholds in me one whom he has
injured even unto death; and I derive no hope from his kindness; no
change can possibly be brought about even by his best intentions. As
well might Cleopatra have worn as an ornament the vinegar which
contained her dissolved pearl, as I be content with the love that
Raymond can now offer me.”

I own that I did not see her misfortune with the same eyes as Perdita.
At all events methought that the wound could be healed; and, if they
remained together, it would be so. I endeavoured therefore to sooth and
soften her mind; and it was not until after many endeavours that I gave
up the task as impracticable. Perdita listened to me impatiently, and
answered with some asperity:—“Do you think that any of your arguments
are new to me? or that my own burning wishes and intense anguish have
not suggested them all a thousand times, with far more eagerness and
subtlety than you can put into them? Lionel, you cannot understand what
woman’s love is. In days of happiness I have often repeated to myself,
with a grateful heart and exulting spirit, all that Raymond sacrificed
for me. I was a poor, uneducated, unbefriended, mountain girl, raised
from nothingness by him. All that I possessed of the luxuries of life
came from him. He gave me an illustrious name and noble station; the
world’s respect reflected from his own glory: all this joined to his
own undying love, inspired me with sensations towards him, akin to
those with which we regard the Giver of life. I gave him love only. I
devoted myself to him: imperfect creature that I was, I took myself to
task, that I might become worthy of him. I watched over my hasty
temper, subdued my burning impatience of character, schooled my
self-engrossing thoughts, educating myself to the best perfection I
might attain, that the fruit of my exertions might be his happiness. I
took no merit to myself for this. He deserved it all—all labour, all
devotion, all sacrifice; I would have toiled up a scaleless Alp, to
pluck a flower that would please him. I was ready to quit you all, my
beloved and gifted companions, and to live only with him, for him. I
could not do otherwise, even if I had wished; for if we are said to
have two souls, he was my better soul, to which the other was a
perpetual slave. One only return did he owe me, even fidelity. I earned
that; I deserved it. Because I was mountain bred, unallied to the noble
and wealthy, shall he think to repay me by an empty name and station?
Let him take them back; without his love they are nothing to me. Their
only merit in my eyes was that they were his.”

Thus passionately Perdita ran on. When I adverted to the question of
their entire separation, she replied: “Be it so! One day the period
will arrive; I know it, and feel it. But in this I am a coward. This
imperfect companionship, and our masquerade of union, are strangely
dear to me. It is painful, I allow, destructive, impracticable. It
keeps up a perpetual fever in my veins; it frets my immedicable wound;
it is instinct with poison. Yet I must cling to it; perhaps it will
kill me soon, and thus perform a thankful office.”

In the mean time, Raymond had remained with Adrian and Idris. He was
naturally frank; the continued absence of Perdita and myself became
remarkable; and Raymond soon found relief from the constraint of
months, by an unreserved confidence with his two friends. He related to
them the situation in which he had found Evadne. At first, from
delicacy to Adrian he concealed her name; but it was divulged in the
course of his narrative, and her former lover heard with the most acute
agitation the history of her sufferings. Idris had shared Perdita’s ill
opinion of the Greek; but Raymond’s account softened and interested
her. Evadne’s constancy, fortitude, even her ill-fated and
ill-regulated love, were matter of admiration and pity; especially
when, from the detail of the events of the nineteenth of October, it
was apparent that she preferred suffering and death to any in her eyes
degrading application for the pity and assistance of her lover. Her
subsequent conduct did not diminish this interest. At first, relieved
from famine and the grave, watched over by Raymond with the tenderest
assiduity, with that feeling of repose peculiar to convalescence,
Evadne gave herself up to rapturous gratitude and love. But reflection
returned with health. She questioned him with regard to the motives
which had occasioned his critical absence. She framed her enquiries
with Greek subtlety; she formed her conclusions with the decision and
firmness peculiar to her disposition. She could not divine, that the
breach which she had occasioned between Raymond and Perdita was already
irreparable: but she knew, that under the present system it would be
widened each day, and that its result must be to destroy her lover’s
happiness, and to implant the fangs of remorse in his heart. From the
moment that she perceived the right line of conduct, she resolved to
adopt it, and to part from Raymond for ever. Conflicting passions,
long-cherished love, and self-inflicted disappointment, made her regard
death alone as sufficient refuge for her woe. But the same feelings and
opinions which had before restrained her, acted with redoubled force;
for she knew that the reflection that he had occasioned her death,
would pursue Raymond through life, poisoning every enjoyment, clouding
every prospect. Besides, though the violence of her anguish made life
hateful, it had not yet produced that monotonous, lethargic sense of
changeless misery which for the most part produces suicide. Her energy
of character induced her still to combat with the ills of life; even
those attendant on hopeless love presented themselves, rather in the
shape of an adversary to be overcome, than of a victor to whom she must
submit. Besides, she had memories of past tenderness to cherish,
smiles, words, and even tears, to con over, which, though remembered in
desertion and sorrow, were to be preferred to the forgetfulness of the
grave. It was impossible to guess at the whole of her plan. Her letter
to Raymond gave no clue for discovery; it assured him, that she was in
no danger of wanting the means of life; she promised in it to preserve
herself, and some future day perhaps to present herself to him in a
station not unworthy of her. She then bade him, with the eloquence of
despair and of unalterable love, a last farewell.

All these circumstances were now related to Adrian and Idris. Raymond
then lamented the cureless evil of his situation with Perdita. He
declared, notwithstanding her harshness, he even called it coldness,
that he loved her. He had been ready once with the humility of a
penitent, and the duty of a vassal, to surrender himself to her; giving
up his very soul to her tutelage, to become her pupil, her slave, her
bondsman. She had rejected these advances; and the time for such
exuberant submission, which must be founded on love and nourished by
it, was now passed. Still all his wishes and endeavours were directed
towards her peace, and his chief discomfort arose from the perception
that he exerted himself in vain. If she were to continue inflexible in
the line of conduct she now pursued, they must part. The combinations
and occurrences of this senseless mode of intercourse were maddening to
him. Yet he would not propose the separation. He was haunted by the
fear of causing the death of one or other of the beings implicated in
these events; and he could not persuade himself to undertake to direct
the course of events, lest, ignorant of the land he traversed, he
should lead those attached to the car into irremediable ruin.

After a discussion on this subject, which lasted for several hours, he
took leave of his friends, and returned to town, unwilling to meet
Perdita before us, conscious, as we all must be, of the thoughts
uppermost in the minds of both. Perdita prepared to follow him with her
child. Idris endeavoured to persuade her to remain. My poor sister
looked at the counsellor with affright. She knew that Raymond had
conversed with her; had he instigated this request?—was this to be the
prelude to their eternal separation?—I have said, that the defects of
her character awoke and acquired vigour from her unnatural position.
She regarded with suspicion the invitation of Idris; she embraced me,
as if she were about to be deprived of my affection also: calling me
her more than brother, her only friend, her last hope, she pathetically
conjured me not to cease to love her; and with encreased anxiety she
departed for London, the scene and cause of all her misery.

The scenes that followed, convinced her that she had not yet fathomed
the obscure gulph into which she had plunged. Her unhappiness assumed
every day a new shape; every day some unexpected event seemed to close,
while in fact it led onward, the train of calamities which now befell
her.

The selected passion of the soul of Raymond was ambition. Readiness of
talent, a capacity of entering into, and leading the dispositions of
men; earnest desire of distinction were the awakeners and nurses of his
ambition. But other ingredients mingled with these, and prevented him
from becoming the calculating, determined character, which alone forms
a successful hero. He was obstinate, but not firm; benevolent in his
first movements; harsh and reckless when provoked. Above all, he was
remorseless and unyielding in the pursuit of any object of desire,
however lawless. Love of pleasure, and the softer sensibilities of our
nature, made a prominent part of his character, conquering the
conqueror; holding him in at the moment of acquisition; sweeping away
ambition’s web; making him forget the toil of weeks, for the sake of
one moment’s indulgence of the new and actual object of his wishes.
Obeying these impulses, he had become the husband of Perdita: egged on
by them, he found himself the lover of Evadne. He had now lost both. He
had neither the ennobling self-gratulation, which constancy inspires,
to console him, nor the voluptuous sense of abandonment to a forbidden,
but intoxicating passion. His heart was exhausted by the recent events;
his enjoyment of life was destroyed by the resentment of Perdita, and
the flight of Evadne; and the inflexibility of the former, set the last
seal upon the annihilation of his hopes. As long as their disunion
remained a secret, he cherished an expectation of re-awakening past
tenderness in her bosom; now that we were all made acquainted with
these occurrences, and that Perdita, by declaring her resolves to
others, in a manner pledged herself to their accomplishment, he gave up
the idea of re-union as futile, and sought only, since he was unable to
influence her to change, to reconcile himself to the present state of
things. He made a vow against love and its train of struggles,
disappointment and remorse, and sought in mere sensual enjoyment, a
remedy for the injurious inroads of passion.

Debasement of character is the certain follower of such pursuits. Yet
this consequence would not have been immediately remarkable, if Raymond
had continued to apply himself to the execution of his plans for the
public benefit, and the fulfilling his duties as Protector. But,
extreme in all things, given up to immediate impressions, he entered
with ardour into this new pursuit of pleasure, and followed up the
incongruous intimacies occasioned by it without reflection or
foresight. The council-chamber was deserted; the crowds which attended
on him as agents to his various projects were neglected. Festivity, and
even libertinism, became the order of the day.

Perdita beheld with affright the encreasing disorder. For a moment she
thought that she could stem the torrent, and that Raymond could be
induced to hear reason from her.—Vain hope! The moment of her influence
was passed. He listened with haughtiness, replied disdainfully; and, if
in truth, she succeeded in awakening his conscience, the sole effect
was that he sought an opiate for the pang in oblivious riot. With the
energy natural to her, Perdita then endeavoured to supply his place.
Their still apparent union permitted her to do much; but no woman
could, in the end, present a remedy to the encreasing negligence of the
Protector; who, as if seized with a paroxysm of insanity, trampled on
all ceremony, all order, all duty, and gave himself up to license.

Reports of these strange proceedings reached us, and we were undecided
what method to adopt to restore our friend to himself and his country,
when Perdita suddenly appeared among us. She detailed the progress of
the mournful change, and entreated Adrian and myself to go up to
London, and endeavour to remedy the encreasing evil:—“Tell him,” she
cried, “tell Lord Raymond, that my presence shall no longer annoy him.
That he need not plunge into this destructive dissipation for the sake
of disgusting me, and causing me to fly. This purpose is now
accomplished; he will never see me more. But let me, it is my last
entreaty, let me in the praises of his countrymen and the prosperity of
England, find the choice of my youth justified.”

During our ride up to town, Adrian and I discussed and argued upon
Raymond’s conduct, and his falling off from the hopes of permanent
excellence on his part, which he had before given us cause to
entertain. My friend and I had both been educated in one school, or
rather I was his pupil in the opinion, that steady adherence to
principle was the only road to honour; a ceaseless observance of the
laws of general utility, the only conscientious aim of human ambition.
But though we both entertained these ideas, we differed in their
application. Resentment added also a sting to my censure; and I
reprobated Raymond’s conduct in severe terms. Adrian was more benign,
more considerate. He admitted that the principles that I laid down were
the best; but he denied that they were the only ones. Quoting the text,
_there are many mansions in my father’s house_, he insisted that the
modes of becoming good or great, varied as much as the dispositions of
men, of whom it might be said, as of the leaves of the forest, there
were no two alike.

We arrived in London at about eleven at night. We conjectured,
notwithstanding what we had heard, that we should find Raymond in St.
Stephen’s: thither we sped. The chamber was full—but there was no
Protector; and there was an austere discontent manifest on the
countenances of the leaders, and a whispering and busy tattle among the
underlings, not less ominous. We hastened to the palace of the
Protectorate. We found Raymond in his dining room with six others: the
bottle was being pushed about merrily, and had made considerable
inroads on the understanding of one or two. He who sat near Raymond was
telling a story, which convulsed the rest with laughter.

Raymond sat among them, though while he entered into the spirit of the
hour, his natural dignity never forsook him. He was gay, playful,
fascinating—but never did he overstep the modesty of nature, or the
respect due to himself, in his wildest sallies. Yet I own, that
considering the task which Raymond had taken on himself as Protector of
England, and the cares to which it became him to attend, I was
exceedingly provoked to observe the worthless fellows on whom his time
was wasted, and the jovial if not drunken spirit which seemed on the
point of robbing him of his better self. I stood watching the scene,
while Adrian flitted like a shadow in among them, and, by a word and
look of sobriety, endeavoured to restore order in the assembly. Raymond
expressed himself delighted to see him, declaring that he should make
one in the festivity of the night.

This action of Adrian provoked me. I was indignant that he should sit
at the same table with the companions of Raymond—men of abandoned
characters, or rather without any, the refuse of high-bred luxury, the
disgrace of their country. “Let me entreat Adrian,” I cried, “not to
comply: rather join with me in endeavouring to withdraw Lord Raymond
from this scene, and restore him to other society.”

“My good fellow,” said Raymond, “this is neither the time nor place for
the delivery of a moral lecture: take my word for it that my amusements
and society are not so bad as you imagine. We are neither hypocrites or
fools —for the rest, ‘Dost thou think because thou art virtuous, there
shall be no more cakes and ale?’”

I turned angrily away: “Verney,” said Adrian, “you are very cynical:
sit down; or if you will not, perhaps, as you are not a frequent
visitor, Lord Raymond will humour you, and accompany us, as we had
previously agreed upon, to parliament.”

Raymond looked keenly at him; he could read benignity only in his
gentle lineaments; he turned to me, observing with scorn my moody and
stern demeanour. “Come,” said Adrian, “I have promised for you, enable
me to keep my engagement. Come with us.”—Raymond made an uneasy
movement, and laconically replied—“I won’t!”

The party in the mean time had broken up. They looked at the pictures,
strolled into the other apartments, talked of billiards, and one by one
vanished. Raymond strode angrily up and down the room. I stood ready to
receive and reply to his reproaches. Adrian leaned against the wall.
“This is infinitely ridiculous,” he cried, “if you were school-boys,
you could not conduct yourselves more unreasonably.”

“You do not understand,” said Raymond. “This is only part of a
system:—a scheme of tyranny to which I will never submit. Because I am
Protector of England, am I to be the only slave in its empire? My
privacy invaded, my actions censured, my friends insulted? But I will
get rid of the whole together.—Be you witnesses,” and he took the star,
insignia of office, from his breast, and threw it on the table. “I
renounce my office, I abdicate my power—assume it who will!”—-

“Let him assume it,” exclaimed Adrian, “who can pronounce himself, or
whom the world will pronounce to be your superior. There does not exist
the man in England with adequate presumption. Know yourself, Raymond,
and your indignation will cease; your complacency return. A few months
ago, whenever we prayed for the prosperity of our country, or our own,
we at the same time prayed for the life and welfare of the Protector,
as indissolubly linked to it. Your hours were devoted to our benefit,
your ambition was to obtain our commendation. You decorated our towns
with edifices, you bestowed on us useful establishments, you gifted the
soil with abundant fertility. The powerful and unjust cowered at the
steps of your judgment-seat, and the poor and oppressed arose like
morn-awakened flowers under the sunshine of your protection.

“Can you wonder that we are all aghast and mourn, when this appears
changed? But, come, this splenetic fit is already passed; resume your
functions; your partizans will hail you; your enemies be silenced; our
love, honour, and duty will again be manifested towards you. Master
yourself, Raymond, and the world is subject to you.”

“All this would be very good sense, if addressed to another,” replied
Raymond, moodily, “con the lesson yourself, and you, the first peer of
the land, may become its sovereign. You the good, the wise, the just,
may rule all hearts. But I perceive, too soon for my own happiness, too
late for England’s good, that I undertook a task to which I am unequal.
I cannot rule myself. My passions are my masters; my smallest impulse
my tyrant. Do you think that I renounced the Protectorate (and I have
renounced it) in a fit of spleen? By the God that lives, I swear never
to take up that bauble again; never again to burthen myself with the
weight of care and misery, of which that is the visible sign.

“Once I desired to be a king. It was in the hey-day of youth, in the
pride of boyish folly. I knew myself when I renounced it. I renounced
it to gain —no matter what—for that also I have lost. For many months I
have submitted to this mock majesty—this solemn jest. I am its dupe no
longer. I will be free.

“I have lost that which adorned and dignified my life; that which
linked me to other men. Again I am a solitary man; and I will become
again, as in my early years, a wanderer, a soldier of fortune. My
friends, for Verney, I feel that you are my friend, do not endeavour to
shake my resolve. Perdita, wedded to an imagination, careless of what
is behind the veil, whose charactery is in truth faulty and vile,
Perdita has renounced me. With her it was pretty enough to play a
sovereign’s part; and, as in the recesses of your beloved forest we
acted masques, and imagined ourselves Arcadian shepherds, to please the
fancy of the moment—so was I content, more for Perdita’s sake than my
own, to take on me the character of one of the great ones of the earth;
to lead her behind the scenes of grandeur, to vary her life with a
short act of magnificence and power. This was to be the colour; love
and confidence the substance of our existence. But we must live, and
not act our lives; pursuing the shadow, I lost the reality—now I
renounce both.

“Adrian, I am about to return to Greece, to become again a soldier,
perhaps a conqueror. Will you accompany me? You will behold new scenes;
see a new people; witness the mighty struggle there going forward
between civilization and barbarism; behold, and perhaps direct the
efforts of a young and vigorous population, for liberty and order. Come
with me. I have expected you. I waited for this moment; all is
prepared;—will you accompany me?”

“I will,” replied Adrian. “Immediately?”

“To-morrow if you will.”

“Reflect!” I cried.

“Wherefore?” asked Raymond—“My dear fellow, I have done nothing else
than reflect on this step the live-long summer; and be assured that
Adrian has condensed an age of reflection into this little moment. Do
not talk of reflection; from this moment I abjure it; this is my only
happy moment during a long interval of time. I must go, Lionel—the Gods
will it; and I must. Do not endeavour to deprive me of my companion,
the out-cast’s friend.

“One word more concerning unkind, unjust Perdita. For a time, I thought
that, by watching a complying moment, fostering the still warm ashes, I
might relume in her the flame of love. It is more cold within her, than
a fire left by gypsies in winter-time, the spent embers crowned by a
pyramid of snow. Then, in endeavouring to do violence to my own
disposition, I made all worse than before. Still I think, that time,
and even absence, may restore her to me. Remember, that I love her
still, that my dearest hope is that she will again be mine. I know,
though she does not, how false the veil is which she has spread over
the reality—do not endeavour to rend this deceptive covering, but by
degrees withdraw it. Present her with a mirror, in which she may know
herself; and, when she is an adept in that necessary but difficult
science, she will wonder at her present mistake, and hasten to restore
to me, what is by right mine, her forgiveness, her kind thoughts, her
love.”




CHAPTER X.


After these events, it was long before we were able to attain any
degree of composure. A moral tempest had wrecked our richly freighted
vessel, and we, remnants of the diminished crew, were aghast at the
losses and changes which we had undergone. Idris passionately loved her
brother, and could ill brook an absence whose duration was uncertain;
his society was dear and necessary to me—I had followed up my chosen
literary occupations with delight under his tutorship and assistance;
his mild philosophy, unerring reason, and enthusiastic friendship were
the best ingredient, the exalted spirit of our circle; even the
children bitterly regretted the loss of their kind playfellow. Deeper
grief oppressed Perdita. In spite of resentment, by day and night she
figured to herself the toils and dangers of the wanderers. Raymond
absent, struggling with difficulties, lost to the power and rank of the
Protectorate, exposed to the perils of war, became an object of anxious
interest; not that she felt any inclination to recall him, if recall
must imply a return to their former union. Such return she felt to be
impossible; and while she believed it to be thus, and with anguish
regretted that so it should be, she continued angry and impatient with
him, who occasioned her misery. These perplexities and regrets caused
her to bathe her pillow with nightly tears, and to reduce her in person
and in mind to the shadow of what she had been. She sought solitude,
and avoided us when in gaiety and unrestrained affection we met in a
family circle. Lonely musings, interminable wanderings, and solemn
music were her only pastimes. She neglected even her child; shutting
her heart against all tenderness, she grew reserved towards me, her
first and fast friend.

I could not see her thus lost, without exerting myself to remedy the
evil —remediless I knew, if I could not in the end bring her to
reconcile herself to Raymond. Before he went I used every argument,
every persuasion to induce her to stop his journey. She answered the
one with a gush of tears—telling me that to be persuaded—life and the
goods of life were a cheap exchange. It was not will that she wanted,
but the capacity; again and again she declared, it were as easy to
enchain the sea, to put reins on the wind’s viewless courses, as for
her to take truth for falsehood, deceit for honesty, heartless
communion for sincere, confiding love. She answered my reasonings more
briefly, declaring with disdain, that the reason was hers; and, until I
could persuade her that the past could be unacted, that maturity could
go back to the cradle, and that all that was could become as though it
had never been, it was useless to assure her that no real change had
taken place in her fate. And thus with stern pride she suffered him to
go, though her very heart-strings cracked at the fulfilling of the act,
which rent from her all that made life valuable.

To change the scene for her, and even for ourselves, all unhinged by
the cloud that had come over us, I persuaded my two remaining
companions that it were better that we should absent ourselves for a
time from Windsor. We visited the north of England, my native Ulswater,
and lingered in scenes dear from a thousand associations. We lengthened
our tour into Scotland, that we might see Loch Katrine and Loch Lomond;
thence we crossed to Ireland, and passed several weeks in the
neighbourhood of Killarney. The change of scene operated to a great
degree as I expected; after a year’s absence, Perdita returned in
gentler and more docile mood to Windsor. The first sight of this place
for a time unhinged her. Here every spot was distinct with associations
now grown bitter. The forest glades, the ferny dells, and lawny
uplands, the cultivated and cheerful country spread around the silver
pathway of ancient Thames, all earth, air, and wave, took up one choral
voice, inspired by memory, instinct with plaintive regret.

But my essay towards bringing her to a saner view of her own situation,
did not end here. Perdita was still to a great degree uneducated. When
first she left her peasant life, and resided with the elegant and
cultivated Evadne, the only accomplishment she brought to any
perfection was that of painting, for which she had a taste almost
amounting to genius. This had occupied her in her lonely cottage, when
she quitted her Greek friend’s protection. Her pallet and easel were
now thrown aside; did she try to paint, thronging recollections made
her hand tremble, her eyes fill with tears. With this occupation she
gave up almost every other; and her mind preyed upon itself almost to
madness.

For my own part, since Adrian had first withdrawn me from my selvatic
wilderness to his own paradise of order and beauty, I had been wedded
to literature. I felt convinced that however it might have been in
former times, in the present stage of the world, no man’s faculties
could be developed, no man’s moral principle be enlarged and liberal,
without an extensive acquaintance with books. To me they stood in the
place of an active career, of ambition, and those palpable excitements
necessary to the multitude. The collation of philosophical opinions,
the study of historical facts, the acquirement of languages, were at
once my recreation, and the serious aim of my life. I turned author
myself. My productions however were sufficiently unpretending; they
were confined to the biography of favourite historical characters,
especially those whom I believed to have been traduced, or about whom
clung obscurity and doubt.

As my authorship increased, I acquired new sympathies and pleasures. I
found another and a valuable link to enchain me to my fellow-creatures;
my point of sight was extended, and the inclinations and capacities of
all human beings became deeply interesting to me. Kings have been
called the fathers of their people. Suddenly I became as it were the
father of all mankind. Posterity became my heirs. My thoughts were gems
to enrich the treasure house of man’s intellectual possessions; each
sentiment was a precious gift I bestowed on them. Let not these
aspirations be attributed to vanity. They were not expressed in words,
nor even reduced to form in my own mind; but they filled my soul,
exalting my thoughts, raising a glow of enthusiasm, and led me out of
the obscure path in which I before walked, into the bright
noon-enlightened highway of mankind, making me, citizen of the world, a
candidate for immortal honors, an eager aspirant to the praise and
sympathy of my fellow men.

No one certainly ever enjoyed the pleasures of composition more
intensely than I. If I left the woods, the solemn music of the waving
branches, and the majestic temple of nature, I sought the vast halls of
the Castle, and looked over wide, fertile England, spread beneath our
regal mount, and listened the while to inspiring strains of music. At
such times solemn harmonies or spirit-stirring airs gave wings to my
lagging thoughts, permitting them, methought, to penetrate the last
veil of nature and her God, and to display the highest beauty in
visible expression to the understandings of men. As the music went on,
my ideas seemed to quit their mortal dwelling house; they shook their
pinions and began a flight, sailing on the placid current of thought,
filling the creation with new glory, and rousing sublime imagery that
else had slept voiceless. Then I would hasten to my desk, weave the
new-found web of mind in firm texture and brilliant colours, leaving
the fashioning of the material to a calmer moment.

But this account, which might as properly belong to a former period of
my life as to the present moment, leads me far afield. It was the
pleasure I took in literature, the discipline of mind I found arise
from it, that made me eager to lead Perdita to the same pursuits. I
began with light hand and gentle allurement; first exciting her
curiosity, and then satisfying it in such a way as might occasion her,
at the same time that she half forgot her sorrows in occupation, to
find in the hours that succeeded a reaction of benevolence and
toleration.

Intellectual activity, though not directed towards books, had always
been my sister’s characteristic. It had been displayed early in life,
leading her out to solitary musing among her native mountains, causing
her to form innumerous combinations from common objects, giving
strength to her perceptions, and swiftness to their arrangement. Love
had come, as the rod of the master-prophet, to swallow up every minor
propensity. Love had doubled all her excellencies, and placed a diadem
on her genius. Was she to cease to love? Take the colours and odour
from the rose, change the sweet nutriment of mother’s milk to gall and
poison; as easily might you wean Perdita from love. She grieved for the
loss of Raymond with an anguish, that exiled all smile from her lips,
and trenched sad lines on her brow of beauty. But each day seemed to
change the nature of her suffering, and every succeeding hour forced
her to alter (if so I may style it) the fashion of her soul’s mourning
garb. For a time music was able to satisfy the cravings of her mental
hunger, and her melancholy thoughts renewed themselves in each change
of key, and varied with every alteration in the strain. My schooling
first impelled her towards books; and, if music had been the food of
sorrow, the productions of the wise became its medicine. The
acquisition of unknown languages was too tedious an occupation, for one
who referred every expression to the universe within, and read not, as
many do, for the mere sake of filling up time; but who was still
questioning herself and her author, moulding every idea in a thousand
ways, ardently desirous for the discovery of truth in every sentence.
She sought to improve her understanding; mechanically her heart and
dispositions became soft and gentle under this benign discipline. After
awhile she discovered, that amidst all her newly acquired knowledge,
her own character, which formerly she fancied that she thoroughly
understood, became the first in rank among the terrae incognitae, the
pathless wilds of a country that had no chart. Erringly and strangely
she began the task of self-examination with self-condemnation. And then
again she became aware of her own excellencies, and began to balance
with juster scales the shades of good and evil. I, who longed beyond
words, to restore her to the happiness it was still in her power to
enjoy, watched with anxiety the result of these internal proceedings.

But man is a strange animal. We cannot calculate on his forces like
that of an engine; and, though an impulse draw with a forty-horse power
at what appears willing to yield to one, yet in contempt of calculation
the movement is not effected. Neither grief, philosophy, nor love could
make Perdita think with mildness of the dereliction of Raymond. She now
took pleasure in my society; towards Idris she felt and displayed a
full and affectionate sense of her worth—she restored to her child in
abundant measure her tenderness and care. But I could discover, amidst
all her repinings, deep resentment towards Raymond, and an unfading
sense of injury, that plucked from me my hope, when I appeared nearest
to its fulfilment. Among other painful restrictions, she has occasioned
it to become a law among us, never to mention Raymond’s name before
her. She refused to read any communications from Greece, desiring me
only to mention when any arrived, and whether the wanderers were well.
It was curious that even little Clara observed this law towards her
mother. This lovely child was nearly eight years of age. Formerly she
had been a light-hearted infant, fanciful, but gay and childish. After
the departure of her father, thought became impressed on her young
brow. Children, unadepts in language, seldom find words to express
their thoughts, nor could we tell in what manner the late events had
impressed themselves on her mind. But certainly she had made deep
observations while she noted in silence the changes that passed around
her. She never mentioned her father to Perdita, she appeared half
afraid when she spoke of him to me, and though I tried to draw her out
on the subject, and to dispel the gloom that hung about her ideas
concerning him, I could not succeed. Yet each foreign post-day she
watched for the arrival of letters—knew the post mark, and watched me
as I read. I found her often poring over the article of Greek
intelligence in the newspaper.

There is no more painful sight than that of untimely care in children,
and it was particularly observable in one whose disposition had
heretofore been mirthful. Yet there was so much sweetness and docility
about Clara, that your admiration was excited; and if the moods of mind
are calculated to paint the cheek with beauty, and endow motions with
grace, surely her contemplations must have been celestial; since every
lineament was moulded into loveliness, and her motions were more
harmonious than the elegant boundings of the fawns of her native
forest. I sometimes expostulated with Perdita on the subject of her
reserve; but she rejected my counsels, while her daughter’s sensibility
excited in her a tenderness still more passionate.

After the lapse of more than a year, Adrian returned from Greece.

When our exiles had first arrived, a truce was in existence between the
Turks and Greeks; a truce that was as sleep to the mortal frame, signal
of renewed activity on waking. With the numerous soldiers of Asia, with
all of warlike stores, ships, and military engines, that wealth and
power could command, the Turks at once resolved to crush an enemy,
which creeping on by degrees, had from their stronghold in the Morea,
acquired Thrace and Macedonia, and had led their armies even to the
gates of Constantinople, while their extensive commercial relations
gave every European nation an interest in their success. Greece
prepared for a vigorous resistance; it rose to a man; and the women,
sacrificing their costly ornaments, accoutred their sons for the war,
and bade them conquer or die with the spirit of the Spartan mother. The
talents and courage of Raymond were highly esteemed among the Greeks.
Born at Athens, that city claimed him for her own, and by giving him
the command of her peculiar division in the army, the
commander-in-chief only possessed superior power. He was numbered among
her citizens, his name was added to the list of Grecian heroes. His
judgment, activity, and consummate bravery, justified their choice. The
Earl of Windsor became a volunteer under his friend.

“It is well,” said Adrian, “to prate of war in these pleasant shades,
and with much ill-spent oil make a show of joy, because many thousand
of our fellow-creatures leave with pain this sweet air and natal earth.
I shall not be suspected of being averse to the Greek cause; I know and
feel its necessity; it is beyond every other a good cause. I have
defended it with my sword, and was willing that my spirit should be
breathed out in its defence; freedom is of more worth than life, and
the Greeks do well to defend their privilege unto death. But let us not
deceive ourselves. The Turks are men; each fibre, each limb is as
feeling as our own, and every spasm, be it mental or bodily, is as
truly felt in a Turk’s heart or brain, as in a Greek’s. The last action
at which I was present was the taking of ——. The Turks resisted to the
last, the garrison perished on the ramparts, and we entered by assault.
Every breathing creature within the walls was massacred. Think you,
amidst the shrieks of violated innocence and helpless infancy, I did
not feel in every nerve the cry of a fellow being? They were men and
women, the sufferers, before they were Mahometans, and when they rise
turbanless from the grave, in what except their good or evil actions
will they be the better or worse than we? Two soldiers contended for a
girl, whose rich dress and extreme beauty excited the brutal appetites
of these wretches, who, perhaps good men among their families, were
changed by the fury of the moment into incarnated evils. An old man,
with a silver beard, decrepid and bald, he might be her grandfather,
interposed to save her; the battle axe of one of them clove his skull.
I rushed to her defence, but rage made them blind and deaf; they did
not distinguish my Christian garb or heed my words—words were blunt
weapons then, for while war cried “havoc,” and murder gave fit echo,
how could I—

Turn back the tide of ills, relieving wrong
With mild accost of soothing eloquence?


One of the fellows, enraged at my interference, struck me with his
bayonet in the side, and I fell senseless.

“This wound will probably shorten my life, having shattered a frame,
weak of itself. But I am content to die. I have learnt in Greece that
one man, more or less, is of small import, while human bodies remain to
fill up the thinned ranks of the soldiery; and that the identity of an
individual may be overlooked, so that the muster roll contain its full
numbers. All this has a different effect upon Raymond. He is able to
contemplate the ideal of war, while I am sensible only to its
realities. He is a soldier, a general. He can influence the
blood-thirsty war-dogs, while I resist their propensities vainly. The
cause is simple. Burke has said that, ‘in all bodies those who would
lead, must also, in a considerable degree, follow.’ —I cannot follow;
for I do not sympathize in their dreams of massacre and glory—to follow
and to lead in such a career, is the natural bent of Raymond’s mind. He
is always successful, and bids fair, at the same time that he acquires
high name and station for himself, to secure liberty, probably extended
empire, to the Greeks.”

Perdita’s mind was not softened by this account. He, she thought, can
be great and happy without me. Would that I also had a career! Would
that I could freight some untried bark with all my hopes, energies, and
desires, and launch it forth into the ocean of life—bound for some
attainable point, with ambition or pleasure at the helm! But adverse
winds detain me on shore; like Ulysses, I sit at the water’s edge and
weep. But my nerveless hands can neither fell the trees, nor smooth the
planks. Under the influence of these melancholy thoughts, she became
more than ever in love with sorrow. Yet Adrian’s presence did some
good; he at once broke through the law of silence observed concerning
Raymond. At first she started from the unaccustomed sound; soon she got
used to it and to love it, and she listened with avidity to the account
of his achievements. Clara got rid also of her restraint; Adrian and
she had been old playfellows; and now, as they walked or rode together,
he yielded to her earnest entreaty, and repeated, for the hundredth
time, some tale of her father’s bravery, munificence, or justice.

Each vessel in the mean time brought exhilarating tidings from Greece.
The presence of a friend in its armies and councils made us enter into
the details with enthusiasm; and a short letter now and then from
Raymond told us how he was engrossed by the interests of his adopted
country. The Greeks were strongly attached to their commercial
pursuits, and would have been satisfied with their present
acquisitions, had not the Turks roused them by invasion. The patriots
were victorious; a spirit of conquest was instilled; and already they
looked on Constantinople as their own. Raymond rose perpetually in
their estimation; but one man held a superior command to him in their
armies. He was conspicuous for his conduct and choice of position in a
battle fought in the plains of Thrace, on the banks of the Hebrus,
which was to decide the fate of Islam. The Mahometans were defeated,
and driven entirely from the country west of this river. The battle was
sanguinary, the loss of the Turks apparently irreparable; the Greeks,
in losing one man, forgot the nameless crowd strewed upon the bloody
field, and they ceased to value themselves on a victory, which cost
them— Raymond.

At the battle of Makri he had led the charge of cavalry, and pursued
the fugitives even to the banks of the Hebrus. His favourite horse was
found grazing by the margin of the tranquil river. It became a question
whether he had fallen among the unrecognized; but no broken ornament or
stained trapping betrayed his fate. It was suspected that the Turks,
finding themselves possessed of so illustrious a captive, resolved to
satisfy their cruelty rather than their avarice, and fearful of the
interference of England, had come to the determination of concealing
for ever the cold-blooded murder of the soldier they most hated and
feared in the squadrons of their enemy.

Raymond was not forgotten in England. His abdication of the
Protectorate had caused an unexampled sensation; and, when his
magnificent and manly system was contrasted with the narrow views of
succeeding politicians, the period of his elevation was referred to
with sorrow. The perpetual recurrence of his name, joined to most
honourable testimonials, in the Greek gazettes, kept up the interest he
had excited. He seemed the favourite child of fortune, and his untimely
loss eclipsed the world, and shewed forth the remnant of mankind with
diminished lustre. They clung with eagerness to the hope held out that
he might yet be alive. Their minister at Constantinople was urged to
make the necessary perquisitions, and should his existence be
ascertained, to demand his release. It was to be hoped that their
efforts would succeed, and that though now a prisoner, the sport of
cruelty and the mark of hate, he would be rescued from danger and
restored to the happiness, power, and honour which he deserved.

The effect of this intelligence upon my sister was striking. She never
for a moment credited the story of his death; she resolved instantly to
go to Greece. Reasoning and persuasion were thrown away upon her; she
would endure no hindrance, no delay. It may be advanced for a truth,
that, if argument or entreaty can turn any one from a desperate
purpose, whose motive and end depends on the strength of the affections
only, then it is right so to turn them, since their docility shews,
that neither the motive nor the end were of sufficient force to bear
them through the obstacles attendant on their undertaking. If, on the
contrary, they are proof against expostulation, this very steadiness is
an omen of success; and it becomes the duty of those who love them, to
assist in smoothing the obstructions in their path. Such sentiments
actuated our little circle. Finding Perdita immoveable, we consulted as
to the best means of furthering her purpose. She could not go alone to
a country where she had no friends, where she might arrive only to hear
the dreadful news, which must overwhelm her with grief and remorse.
Adrian, whose health had always been weak, now suffered considerable
aggravation of suffering from the effects of his wound. Idris could not
endure to leave him in this state; nor was it right either to quit or
take with us a young family for a journey of this description. I
resolved at length to accompany Perdita. The separation from my Idris
was painful—but necessity reconciled us to it in some degree: necessity
and the hope of saving Raymond, and restoring him again to happiness
and Perdita. No delay was to ensue. Two days after we came to our
determination, we set out for Portsmouth, and embarked. The season was
May, the weather stormless; we were promised a prosperous voyage.
Cherishing the most fervent hopes, embarked on the waste ocean, we saw
with delight the receding shore of Britain, and on the wings of desire
outspeeded our well filled sails towards the South. The light curling
waves bore us onward, and old ocean smiled at the freight of love and
hope committed to his charge; it stroked gently its tempestuous plains,
and the path was smoothed for us. Day and night the wind right aft,
gave steady impulse to our keel—nor did rough gale, or treacherous
sand, or destructive rock interpose an obstacle between my sister and
the land which was to restore her to her first beloved,

Her dear heart’s confessor—a heart within that heart.




VOL. II.




CHAPTER I.


During this voyage, when on calm evenings we conversed on deck,
watching the glancing of the waves and the changeful appearances of the
sky, I discovered the total revolution that the disasters of Raymond
had wrought in the mind of my sister. Were they the same waters of
love, which, lately cold and cutting as ice, repelling as that, now
loosened from their frozen chains, flowed through the regions of her
soul in gushing and grateful exuberance? She did not believe that he
was dead, but she knew that he was in danger, and the hope of assisting
in his liberation, and the idea of soothing by tenderness the ills that
he might have undergone, elevated and harmonized the late jarring
element of her being. I was not so sanguine as she as to the result of
our voyage. She was not sanguine, but secure; and the expectation of
seeing the lover she had banished, the husband, friend, heart’s
companion from whom she had long been alienated, wrapt her senses in
delight, her mind in placidity. It was beginning life again; it was
leaving barren sands for an abode of fertile beauty; it was a harbour
after a tempest, an opiate after sleepless nights, a happy waking from
a terrible dream.

Little Clara accompanied us; the poor child did not well understand
what was going forward. She heard that we were bound for Greece, that
she would see her father, and now, for the first time, she prattled of
him to her mother.

On landing at Athens we found difficulties encrease upon us: nor could
the storied earth or balmy atmosphere inspire us with enthusiasm or
pleasure, while the fate of Raymond was in jeopardy. No man had ever
excited so strong an interest in the public mind; this was apparent
even among the phlegmatic English, from whom he had long been absent.
The Athenians had expected their hero to return in triumph; the women
had taught their children to lisp his name joined to thanksgiving; his
manly beauty, his courage, his devotion to their cause, made him appear
in their eyes almost as one of the ancient deities of the soil
descended from their native Olympus to defend them. When they spoke of
his probable death and certain captivity, tears streamed from their
eyes; even as the women of Syria sorrowed for Adonis, did the wives and
mothers of Greece lament our English Raymond—Athens was a city of
mourning.

All these shews of despair struck Perdita with affright. With that
sanguine but confused expectation, which desire engendered while she
was at a distance from reality, she had formed an image in her mind of
instantaneous change, when she should set her foot on Grecian shores.
She fancied that Raymond would already be free, and that her tender
attentions would come to entirely obliterate even the memory of his
mischance. But his fate was still uncertain; she began to fear the
worst, and to feel that her soul’s hope was cast on a chance that might
prove a blank. The wife and lovely child of Lord Raymond became objects
of intense interest in Athens. The gates of their abode were besieged,
audible prayers were breathed for his restoration; all these
circumstances added to the dismay and fears of Perdita.

My exertions were unremitted: after a time I left Athens, and joined
the army stationed at Kishan in Thrace. Bribery, threats, and intrigue,
soon discovered the secret that Raymond was alive, a prisoner,
suffering the most rigorous confinement and wanton cruelties. We put in
movement every impulse of policy and money to redeem him from their
hands.

The impatience of my sister’s disposition now returned on her, awakened
by repentance, sharpened by remorse. The very beauty of the Grecian
climate, during the season of spring, added torture to her sensations.
The unexampled loveliness of the flower-clad earth—the genial sunshine
and grateful shade—the melody of the birds—the majesty of the woods—
the splendour of the marble ruins—the clear effulgence of the stars by
night—the combination of all that was exciting and voluptuous in this
transcending land, by inspiring a quicker spirit of life and an added
sensitiveness to every articulation of her frame, only gave edge to the
poignancy of her grief. Each long hour was counted, and “_He suffers_”
was the burthen of all her thoughts. She abstained from food; she lay
on the bare earth, and, by such mimickry of his enforced torments,
endeavoured to hold communion with his distant pain. I remembered in
one of her harshest moments a quotation of mine had roused her to anger
and disdain. “Perdita,” I had said, “some day you will discover that
you have done wrong in again casting Raymond on the thorns of life.
When disappointment has sullied his beauty, when a soldier’s hardships
have bent his manly form, and loneliness made even triumph bitter to
him, then you will repent; and regret for the irreparable change

“will move
        In hearts all rocky now, the late remorse of love.”[1]


The stinging “remorse of love” now pierced her heart. She accused
herself of his journey to Greece—his dangers—his imprisonment. She
pictured to herself the anguish of his solitude; she remembered with
what eager delight he had in former days made her the partner of his
joyful hopes— with what grateful affection he received her sympathy in
his cares. She called to mind how often he had declared that solitude
was to him the greatest of all evils, and how death itself was to him
more full of fear and pain when he pictured to himself a lonely grave.
“My best girl,” he had said, “relieves me from these phantasies. United
to her, cherished in her dear heart, never again shall I know the
misery of finding myself alone. Even if I die before you, my Perdita,
treasure up my ashes till yours may mingle with mine. It is a foolish
sentiment for one who is not a materialist, yet, methinks, even in that
dark cell, I may feel that my inanimate dust mingles with yours, and
thus have a companion in decay.” In her resentful mood, these
expressions had been remembered with acrimony and disdain; they visited
her in her softened hour, taking sleep from her eyes, all hope of rest
from her uneasy mind.

Two months passed thus, when at last we obtained a promise of Raymond’s
release. Confinement and hardship had undermined his health; the Turks
feared an accomplishment of the threats of the English government, if
he died under their hands; they looked upon his recovery as impossible;
they delivered him up as a dying man, willingly making over to us the
rites of burial.

He came by sea from Constantinople to Athens. The wind, favourable to
him, blew so strongly in shore, that we were unable, as we had at first
intended, to meet him on his watery road. The watchtower of Athens was
besieged by inquirers, each sail eagerly looked out for; till on the
first of May the gallant frigate bore in sight, freighted with treasure
more invaluable than the wealth which, piloted from Mexico, the vexed
Pacific swallowed, or that was conveyed over its tranquil bosom to
enrich the crown of Spain. At early dawn the vessel was discovered
bearing in shore; it was conjectured that it would cast anchor about
five miles from land. The news spread through Athens, and the whole
city poured out at the gate of the Piraeus, down the roads, through the
vineyards, the olive woods and plantations of fig-trees, towards the
harbour. The noisy joy of the populace, the gaudy colours of their
dress, the tumult of carriages and horses, the march of soldiers
intermixed, the waving of banners and sound of martial music added to
the high excitement of the scene; while round us reposed in solemn
majesty the relics of antient time. To our right the Acropolis rose
high, spectatress of a thousand changes, of ancient glory, Turkish
slavery, and the restoration of dear-bought liberty; tombs and
cenotaphs were strewed thick around, adorned by ever renewing
vegetation; the mighty dead hovered over their monuments, and beheld in
our enthusiasm and congregated numbers a renewal of the scenes in which
they had been the actors. Perdita and Clara rode in a close carriage; I
attended them on horseback. At length we arrived at the harbour; it was
agitated by the outward swell of the sea; the beach, as far could be
discerned, was covered by a moving multitude, which, urged by those
behind toward the sea, again rushed back as the heavy waves with sullen
roar burst close to them. I applied my glass, and could discern that
the frigate had already cast anchor, fearful of the danger of
approaching nearer to a lee shore: a boat was lowered; with a pang I
saw that Raymond was unable to descend the vessel’s side; he was let
down in a chair, and lay wrapt in cloaks at the bottom of the boat.

I dismounted, and called to some sailors who were rowing about the
harbour to pull up, and take me into their skiff; Perdita at the same
moment alighted from her carriage—she seized my arm—“Take me with you,”
she cried; she was trembling and pale; Clara clung to her—“You must
not,” I said, “the sea is rough—he will soon be here—do you not see his
boat?” The little bark to which I had beckoned had now pulled up;
before I could stop her, Perdita, assisted by the sailors was in
it—Clara followed her mother—a loud shout echoed from the crowd as we
pulled out of the inner harbour; while my sister at the prow, had
caught hold of one of the men who was using a glass, asking a thousand
questions, careless of the spray that broke over her, deaf, sightless
to all, except the little speck that, just visible on the top of the
waves, evidently neared. We approached with all the speed six rowers
could give; the orderly and picturesque dress of the soldiers on the
beach, the sounds of exulting music, the stirring breeze and waving
flags, the unchecked exclamations of the eager crowd, whose dark looks
and foreign garb were purely eastern; the sight of temple-crowned rock,
the white marble of the buildings glittering in the sun, and standing
in bright relief against the dark ridge of lofty mountains beyond; the
near roar of the sea, the splash of oars, and dash of spray, all
steeped my soul in a delirium, unfelt, unimagined in the common course
of common life. Trembling, I was unable to continue to look through the
glass with which I had watched the motion of the crew, when the
frigate’s boat had first been launched. We rapidly drew near, so that
at length the number and forms of those within could be discerned; its
dark sides grew big, and the splash of its oars became audible: I could
distinguish the languid form of my friend, as he half raised himself at
our approach.

Perdita’s questions had ceased; she leaned on my arm, panting with
emotions too acute for tears—our men pulled alongside the other boat.
As a last effort, my sister mustered her strength, her firmness; she
stepped from one boat to the other, and then with a shriek she sprang
towards Raymond, knelt at his side, and glueing her lips to the hand
she seized, her face shrouded by her long hair, gave herself up to
tears.

Raymond had somewhat raised himself at our approach, but it was with
difficulty that he exerted himself even thus much. With sunken cheek
and hollow eyes, pale and gaunt, how could I recognize the beloved of
Perdita? I continued awe-struck and mute—he looked smilingly on the
poor girl; the smile was his. A day of sun-shine falling on a dark
valley, displays its before hidden characteristics; and now this smile,
the same with which he first spoke love to Perdita, with which he had
welcomed the protectorate, playing on his altered countenance, made me
in my heart’s core feel that this was Raymond.

He stretched out to me his other hand; I discerned the trace of
manacles on his bared wrist. I heard my sister’s sobs, and thought,
happy are women who can weep, and in a passionate caress disburthen the
oppression of their feelings; shame and habitual restraint hold back a
man. I would have given worlds to have acted as in days of boyhood,
have strained him to my breast, pressed his hand to my lips, and wept
over him; my swelling heart choked me; the natural current would not be
checked; the big rebellious tears gathered in my eyes; I turned aside,
and they dropped in the sea—they came fast and faster;—yet I could
hardly be ashamed, for I saw that the rough sailors were not unmoved,
and Raymond’s eyes alone were dry from among our crew. He lay in that
blessed calm which convalescence always induces, enjoying in secure
tranquillity his liberty and re-union with her whom he adored. Perdita
at length subdued her burst of passion, and rose, —she looked round for
Clara; the child frightened, not recognizing her father, and neglected
by us, had crept to the other end of the boat; she came at her mother’s
call. Perdita presented her to Raymond; her first words were: “Beloved,
embrace our child!”

“Come hither, sweet one,” said her father, “do you not know me?” she
knew his voice, and cast herself in his arms with half bashful but
uncontrollable emotion.

Perceiving the weakness of Raymond, I was afraid of ill consequences
from the pressure of the crowd on his landing. But they were awed as I
had been, at the change of his appearance. The music died away, the
shouts abruptly ended; the soldiers had cleared a space in which a
carriage was drawn up. He was placed in it; Perdita and Clara entered
with him, and his escort closed round it; a hollow murmur, akin to the
roaring of the near waves, went through the multitude; they fell back
as the carriage advanced, and fearful of injuring him they had come to
welcome, by loud testimonies of joy, they satisfied themselves with
bending in a low salaam as the carriage passed; it went slowly along
the road of the Piraeus; passed by antique temple and heroic tomb,
beneath the craggy rock of the citadel. The sound of the waves was left
behind; that of the multitude continued at intervals, supressed and
hoarse; and though, in the city, the houses, churches, and public
buildings were decorated with tapestry and banners—though the soldiery
lined the streets, and the inhabitants in thousands were assembled to
give him hail, the same solemn silence prevailed, the soldiery
presented arms, the banners vailed, many a white hand waved a streamer,
and vainly sought to discern the hero in the vehicle, which, closed and
encompassed by the city guards, drew him to the palace allotted for his
abode.

Raymond was weak and exhausted, yet the interest he perceived to be
excited on his account, filled him with proud pleasure. He was nearly
killed with kindness. It is true, the populace retained themselves; but
there arose a perpetual hum and bustle from the throng round the
palace, which added to the noise of fireworks, the frequent explosion
of arms, the tramp to and fro of horsemen and carriages, to which
effervescence he was the focus, retarded his recovery. So we retired
awhile to Eleusis, and here rest and tender care added each day to the
strength of our invalid. The zealous attention of Perdita claimed the
first rank in the causes which induced his rapid recovery; but the
second was surely the delight he felt in the affection and good will of
the Greeks. We are said to love much those whom we greatly benefit.
Raymond had fought and conquered for the Athenians; he had suffered, on
their account, peril, imprisonment, and hardship; their gratitude
affected him deeply, and he inly vowed to unite his fate for ever to
that of a people so enthusiastically devoted to him.

Social feeling and sympathy constituted a marked feature in my
disposition. In early youth, the living drama acted around me, drew me
heart and soul into its vortex. I was now conscious of a change. I
loved, I hoped, I enjoyed; but there was something besides this. I was
inquisitive as to the internal principles of action of those around me:
anxious to read their thoughts justly, and for ever occupied in
divining their inmost mind. All events, at the same time that they
deeply interested me, arranged themselves in pictures before me. I gave
the right place to every personage in the groupe, the just balance to
every sentiment. This undercurrent of thought, often soothed me amidst
distress, and even agony. It gave ideality to that, from which, taken
in naked truth, the soul would have revolted: it bestowed pictorial
colours on misery and disease, and not unfrequently relieved me from
despair in deplorable changes. This faculty, or instinct, was now
rouzed. I watched the re-awakened devotion of my sister; Clara’s timid,
but concentrated admiration of her father, and Raymond’s appetite for
renown, and sensitiveness to the demonstrations of affection of the
Athenians. Attentively perusing this animated volume, I was the less
surprised at the tale I read on the new-turned page.

The Turkish army were at this time besieging Rodosto; and the Greeks,
hastening their preparations, and sending each day reinforcements, were
on the eve of forcing the enemy to battle. Each people looked on the
coming struggle as that which would be to a great degree decisive; as,
in case of victory, the next step would be the siege of Constantinople
by the Greeks. Raymond, being somewhat recovered, prepared to re-assume
his command in the army.

Perdita did not oppose herself to his determination. She only
stipulated to be permitted to accompany him. She had set down no rule
of conduct for herself; but for her life she could not have opposed his
slightest wish, or do other than acquiesce cheerfully in all his
projects. One word, in truth, had alarmed her more than battles or
sieges, during which she trusted Raymond’s high command would exempt
him from danger. That word, as yet it was not more to her, was PLAGUE.
This enemy to the human race had begun early in June to raise its
serpent-head on the shores of the Nile; parts of Asia, not usually
subject to this evil, were infected. It was in Constantinople; but as
each year that city experienced a like visitation, small attention was
paid to those accounts which declared more people to have died there
already, than usually made up the accustomed prey of the whole of the
hotter months. However it might be, neither plague nor war could
prevent Perdita from following her lord, or induce her to utter one
objection to the plans which he proposed. To be near him, to be loved
by him, to feel him again her own, was the limit of her desires. The
object of her life was to do him pleasure: it had been so before, but
with a difference. In past times, without thought or foresight she had
made him happy, being so herself, and in any question of choice,
consulted her own wishes, as being one with his. Now she sedulously put
herself out of the question, sacrificing even her anxiety for his
health and welfare to her resolve not to oppose any of his desires.
Love of the Greek people, appetite for glory, and hatred of the
barbarian government under which he had suffered even to the approach
of death, stimulated him. He wished to repay the kindness of the
Athenians, to keep alive the splendid associations connected with his
name, and to eradicate from Europe a power which, while every other
nation advanced in civilization, stood still, a monument of antique
barbarism. Having effected the reunion of Raymond and Perdita, I was
eager to return to England; but his earnest request, added to awakening
curiosity, and an indefinable anxiety to behold the catastrophe, now
apparently at hand, in the long drawn history of Grecian and Turkish
warfare, induced me to consent to prolong until the autumn, the period
of my residence in Greece.

As soon as the health of Raymond was sufficiently re-established, he
prepared to join the Grecian camp, near Kishan, a town of some
importance, situated to the east of the Hebrus; in which Perdita and
Clara were to remain until the event of the expected battle. We quitted
Athens on the 2nd of June. Raymond had recovered from the gaunt and
pallid looks of fever. If I no longer saw the fresh glow of youth on
his matured countenance, if care had besieged his brow,

“And dug deep trenches in his beauty’s field,”[2]


if his hair, slightly mingled with grey, and his look, considerate even
in its eagerness, gave signs of added years and past sufferings, yet
there was something irresistibly affecting in the sight of one, lately
snatched from the grave, renewing his career, untamed by sickness or
disaster. The Athenians saw in him, not as heretofore, the heroic boy
or desperate man, who was ready to die for them; but the prudent
commander, who for their sakes was careful of his life, and could make
his own warrior-propensities second to the scheme of conduct policy
might point out.

All Athens accompanied us for several miles. When he had landed a month
ago, the noisy populace had been hushed by sorrow and fear; but this
was a festival day to all. The air resounded with their shouts; their
picturesque costume, and the gay colours of which it was composed,
flaunted in the sunshine; their eager gestures and rapid utterance
accorded with their wild appearance. Raymond was the theme of every
tongue, the hope of each wife, mother or betrothed bride, whose
husband, child, or lover, making a part of the Greek army, were to be
conducted to victory by him.

Notwithstanding the hazardous object of our journey, it was full of
romantic interest, as we passed through the vallies, and over the
hills, of this divine country. Raymond was inspirited by the intense
sensations of recovered health; he felt that in being general of the
Athenians, he filled a post worthy of his ambition; and, in his hope of
the conquest of Constantinople, he counted on an event which would be
as a landmark in the waste of ages, an exploit unequalled in the annals
of man; when a city of grand historic association, the beauty of whose
site was the wonder of the world, which for many hundred years had been
the strong hold of the Moslems, should be rescued from slavery and
barbarism, and restored to a people illustrious for genius,
civilization, and a spirit of liberty. Perdita rested on his restored
society, on his love, his hopes and fame, even as a Sybarite on a
luxurious couch; every thought was transport, each emotion bathed as it
were in a congenial and balmy element.

We arrived at Kishan on the 7th of July. The weather during our journey
had been serene. Each day, before dawn, we left our night’s encampment,
and watched the shadows as they retreated from hill and valley, and the
golden splendour of the sun’s approach. The accompanying soldiers
received, with national vivacity, enthusiastic pleasure from the sight
of beautiful nature. The uprising of the star of day was hailed by
triumphant strains, while the birds, heard by snatches, filled up the
intervals of the music. At noon, we pitched our tents in some shady
valley, or embowering wood among the mountains, while a stream
prattling over pebbles induced grateful sleep. Our evening march, more
calm, was yet more delightful than the morning restlessness of spirit.
If the band played, involuntarily they chose airs of moderated passion;
the farewell of love, or lament at absence, was followed and closed by
some solemn hymn, which harmonized with the tranquil loveliness of
evening, and elevated the soul to grand and religious thought. Often
all sounds were suspended, that we might listen to the nightingale,
while the fire-flies danced in bright measure, and the soft cooing of
the aziolo spoke of fair weather to the travellers. Did we pass a
valley? Soft shades encompassed us, and rocks tinged with beauteous
hues. If we traversed a mountain, Greece, a living map, was spread
beneath, her renowned pinnacles cleaving the ether; her rivers
threading in silver line the fertile land. Afraid almost to breathe, we
English travellers surveyed with extasy this splendid landscape, so
different from the sober hues and melancholy graces of our native
scenery. When we quitted Macedonia, the fertile but low plains of
Thrace afforded fewer beauties; yet our journey continued to be
interesting. An advanced guard gave information of our approach, and
the country people were quickly in motion to do honour to Lord Raymond.
The villages were decorated by triumphal arches of greenery by day, and
lamps by night; tapestry waved from the windows, the ground was strewed
with flowers, and the name of Raymond, joined to that of Greece, was
echoed in the _Evive_ of the peasant crowd.

When we arrived at Kishan, we learnt, that on hearing of the advance of
Lord Raymond and his detachment, the Turkish army had retreated from
Rodosto; but meeting with a reinforcement, they had re-trod their
steps. In the meantime, Argyropylo, the Greek commander-in-chief, had
advanced, so as to be between the Turks and Rodosto; a battle, it was
said, was inevitable. Perdita and her child were to remain at Kishan.
Raymond asked me, if I would not continue with them. “Now by the fells
of Cumberland,” I cried, “by all of the vagabond and poacher that
appertains to me, I will stand at your side, draw my sword in the Greek
cause, and be hailed as a victor along with you!”

All the plain, from Kishan to Rodosto, a distance of sixteen leagues,
was alive with troops, or with the camp-followers, all in motion at the
approach of a battle. The small garrisons were drawn from the various
towns and fortresses, and went to swell the main army. We met baggage
waggons, and many females of high and low rank returning to Fairy or
Kishan, there to wait the issue of the expected day. When we arrived at
Rodosto, we found that the field had been taken, and the scheme of the
battle arranged. The sound of firing, early on the following morning,
informed us that advanced posts of the armies were engaged. Regiment
after regiment advanced, their colours flying and bands playing. They
planted the cannon on the tumuli, sole elevations in this level
country, and formed themselves into column and hollow square; while the
pioneers threw up small mounds for their protection.

These then were the preparations for a battle, nay, the battle itself;
far different from any thing the imagination had pictured. We read of
centre and wing in Greek and Roman history; we fancy a spot, plain as a
table, and soldiers small as chessmen; and drawn forth, so that the
most ignorant of the game can discover science and order in the
disposition of the forces. When I came to the reality, and saw
regiments file off to the left far out of sight, fields intervening
between the battalions, but a few troops sufficiently near me to
observe their motions, I gave up all idea of understanding, even of
seeing a battle, but attaching myself to Raymond attended with intense
interest to his actions. He shewed himself collected, gallant and
imperial; his commands were prompt, his intuition of the events of the
day to me miraculous. In the mean time the cannon roared; the music
lifted up its enlivening voice at intervals; and we on the highest of
the mounds I mentioned, too far off to observe the fallen sheaves which
death gathered into his storehouse, beheld the regiments, now lost in
smoke, now banners and staves peering above the cloud, while shout and
clamour drowned every sound.

Early in the day, Argyropylo was wounded dangerously, and Raymond
assumed the command of the whole army. He made few remarks, till, on
observing through his glass the sequel of an order he had given, his
face, clouded for awhile with doubt, became radiant. “The day is ours,”
he cried, “the Turks fly from the bayonet.” And then swiftly he
dispatched his aides-de-camp to command the horse to fall on the routed
enemy. The defeat became total; the cannon ceased to roar; the infantry
rallied, and horse pursued the flying Turks along the dreary plain; the
staff of Raymond was dispersed in various directions, to make
observations, and bear commands. Even I was dispatched to a distant
part of the field.

The ground on which the battle was fought, was a level plain—so level,
that from the tumuli you saw the waving line of mountains on the
wide-stretched horizon; yet the intervening space was unvaried by the
least irregularity, save such undulations as resembled the waves of the
sea. The whole of this part of Thrace had been so long a scene of
contest, that it had remained uncultivated, and presented a dreary,
barren appearance. The order I had received, was to make an observation
of the direction which a detachment of the enemy might have taken, from
a northern tumulus; the whole Turkish army, followed by the Greek, had
poured eastward; none but the dead remained in the direction of my
side. From the top of the mound, I looked far round—all was silent and
deserted.

The last beams of the nearly sunken sun shot up from behind the far
summit of Mount Athos; the sea of Marmora still glittered beneath its
rays, while the Asiatic coast beyond was half hid in a haze of low
cloud. Many a casque, and bayonet, and sword, fallen from unnerved
arms, reflected the departing ray; they lay scattered far and near.
From the east, a band of ravens, old inhabitants of the Turkish
cemeteries, came sailing along towards their harvest; the sun
disappeared. This hour, melancholy yet sweet, has always seemed to me
the time when we are most naturally led to commune with higher powers;
our mortal sternness departs, and gentle complacency invests the soul.
But now, in the midst of the dying and the dead, how could a thought of
heaven or a sensation of tranquillity possess one of the murderers?
During the busy day, my mind had yielded itself a willing slave to the
state of things presented to it by its fellow-beings; historical
association, hatred of the foe, and military enthusiasm had held
dominion over me. Now, I looked on the evening star, as softly and
calmly it hung pendulous in the orange hues of sunset. I turned to the
corse-strewn earth; and felt ashamed of my species. So perhaps were the
placid skies; for they quickly veiled themselves in mist, and in this
change assisted the swift disappearance of twilight usual in the south;
heavy masses of cloud floated up from the south east, and red and
turbid lightning shot from their dark edges; the rushing wind disturbed
the garments of the dead, and was chilled as it passed over their icy
forms. Darkness gathered round; the objects about me became indistinct,
I descended from my station, and with difficulty guided my horse, so as
to avoid the slain.

Suddenly I heard a piercing shriek; a form seemed to rise from the
earth; it flew swiftly towards me, sinking to the ground again as it
drew near. All this passed so suddenly, that I with difficulty reined
in my horse, so that it should not trample on the prostrate being. The
dress of this person was that of a soldier, but the bared neck and
arms, and the continued shrieks discovered a female thus disguised. I
dismounted to her aid, while she, with heavy groans, and her hand
placed on her side, resisted my attempt to lead her on. In the hurry of
the moment I forgot that I was in Greece, and in my native accents
endeavoured to soothe the sufferer. With wild and terrific exclamations
did the lost, dying Evadne (for it was she) recognize the language of
her lover; pain and fever from her wound had deranged her intellects,
while her piteous cries and feeble efforts to escape, penetrated me
with compassion. In wild delirium she called upon the name of Raymond;
she exclaimed that I was keeping him from her, while the Turks with
fearful instruments of torture were about to take his life. Then again
she sadly lamented her hard fate; that a woman, with a woman’s heart
and sensibility, should be driven by hopeless love and vacant hopes to
take up the trade of arms, and suffer beyond the endurance of man
privation, labour, and pain—the while her dry, hot hand pressed mine,
and her brow and lips burned with consuming fire.

As her strength grew less, I lifted her from the ground; her emaciated
form hung over my arm, her sunken cheek rested on my breast; in a
sepulchral voice she murmured:—“This is the end of love!—Yet not the
end!”— and frenzy lent her strength as she cast her arm up to heaven:
“there is the end! there we meet again. Many living deaths have I borne
for thee, O Raymond, and now I expire, thy victim!—By my death I
purchase thee— lo! the instruments of war, fire, the plague are my
servitors. I dared, I conquered them all, till now! I have sold myself
to death, with the sole condition that thou shouldst follow me—Fire,
and war, and plague, unite for thy destruction—O my Raymond, there is
no safety for thee!”

With an heavy heart I listened to the changes of her delirium; I made
her a bed of cloaks; her violence decreased and a clammy dew stood on
her brow as the paleness of death succeeded to the crimson of fever, I
placed her on the cloaks. She continued to rave of her speedy meeting
with her beloved in the grave, of his death nigh at hand; sometimes she
solemnly declared that he was summoned; sometimes she bewailed his hard
destiny. Her voice grew feebler, her speech interrupted; a few
convulsive movements, and her muscles relaxed, the limbs fell, no more
to be sustained, one deep sigh, and life was gone.

I bore her from the near neighbourhood of the dead; wrapt in cloaks, I
placed her beneath a tree. Once more I looked on her altered face; the
last time I saw her she was eighteen; beautiful as poet’s vision,
splendid as a Sultana of the East—Twelve years had past; twelve years
of change, sorrow and hardship; her brilliant complexion had become
worn and dark, her limbs had lost the roundness of youth and womanhood;
her eyes had sunk deep,

        Crushed and o’erworn,
The hours had drained her blood, and filled her brow
With lines and wrinkles.


With shuddering horror I veiled this monument of human passion and
human misery; I heaped over her all of flags and heavy accoutrements I
could find, to guard her from birds and beasts of prey, until I could
bestow on her a fitting grave. Sadly and slowly I stemmed my course
from among the heaps of slain, and, guided by the twinkling lights of
the town, at length reached Rodosto.

 [1] Lord Byron’s Fourth Canto of Childe Harolde.


 [2] Shakspeare’s Sonnets.




CHAPTER II.


On my arrival, I found that an order had already gone forth for the
army to proceed immediately towards Constantinople; and the troops
which had suffered least in the battle were already on their way. The
town was full of tumult. The wound, and consequent inability of
Argyropylo, caused Raymond to be the first in command. He rode through
the town, visiting the wounded, and giving such orders as were
necessary for the siege he meditated. Early in the morning the whole
army was in motion. In the hurry I could hardly find an opportunity to
bestow the last offices on Evadne. Attended only by my servant, I dug a
deep grave for her at the foot of the tree, and without disturbing her
warrior shroud, I placed her in it, heaping stones upon the grave. The
dazzling sun and glare of daylight, deprived the scene of solemnity;
from Evadne’s low tomb, I joined Raymond and his staff, now on their
way to the Golden City.

Constantinople was invested, trenches dug, and advances made. The whole
Greek fleet blockaded it by sea; on land from the river Kyat Kbanah,
near the Sweet Waters, to the Tower of Marmora, on the shores of the
Propontis, along the whole line of the ancient walls, the trenches of
the siege were drawn. We already possessed Pera; the Golden Horn
itself, the city, bastioned by the sea, and the ivy-mantled walls of
the Greek emperors was all of Europe that the Mahometans could call
theirs. Our army looked on her as certain prey. They counted the
garrison; it was impossible that it should be relieved; each sally was
a victory; for, even when the Turks were triumphant, the loss of men
they sustained was an irreparable injury. I rode one morning with
Raymond to the lofty mound, not far from the Top Kapou, (Cannon-gate),
on which Mahmoud planted his standard, and first saw the city. Still
the same lofty domes and minarets towered above the verdurous walls,
where Constantine had died, and the Turk had entered the city. The
plain around was interspersed with cemeteries, Turk, Greek, and
Armenian, with their growth of cypress trees; and other woods of more
cheerful aspect, diversified the scene. Among them the Greek army was
encamped, and their squadrons moved to and fro—now in regular march,
now in swift career.

Raymond’s eyes were fixed on the city. “I have counted the hours of her
life,” said he; “one month, and she falls. Remain with me till then;
wait till you see the cross on St. Sophia; and then return to your
peaceful glades.”

“You then,” I asked, “still remain in Greece?”

“Assuredly,” replied Raymond. “Yet Lionel, when I say this, believe me
I look back with regret to our tranquil life at Windsor. I am but half
a soldier; I love the renown, but not the trade of war. Before the
battle of Rodosto I was full of hope and spirit; to conquer there, and
afterwards to take Constantinople, was the hope, the bourne, the
fulfilment of my ambition. This enthusiasm is now spent, I know not
why; I seem to myself to be entering a darksome gulph; the ardent
spirit of the army is irksome to me, the rapture of triumph null.”

He paused, and was lost in thought. His serious mien recalled, by some
association, the half-forgotten Evadne to my mind, and I seized this
opportunity to make enquiries from him concerning her strange lot. I
asked him, if he had ever seen among the troops any one resembling her;
if since he had returned to Greece he had heard of her?

He started at her name,—he looked uneasily on me. “Even so,” he cried,
“I knew you would speak of her. Long, long I had forgotten her. Since
our encampment here, she daily, hourly visits my thoughts. When I am
addressed, her name is the sound I expect: in every communication, I
imagine that she will form a part. At length you have broken the spell;
tell me what you know of her.”

I related my meeting with her; the story of her death was told and
re-told. With painful earnestness he questioned me concerning her
prophecies with regard to him. I treated them as the ravings of a
maniac. “No, no,” he said, “do not deceive yourself,—me you cannot. She
has said nothing but what I knew before—though this is confirmation.
Fire, the sword, and plague! They may all be found in yonder city; on
my head alone may they fall!”

From this day Raymond’s melancholy increased. He secluded himself as
much as the duties of his station permitted. When in company, sadness
would in spite of every effort steal over his features, and he sat
absent and mute among the busy crowd that thronged about him. Perdita
rejoined him, and before her he forced himself to appear cheerful, for
she, even as a mirror, changed as he changed, and if he were silent and
anxious, she solicitously inquired concerning, and endeavoured to
remove the cause of his seriousness. She resided at the palace of Sweet
Waters, a summer seraglio of the Sultan; the beauty of the surrounding
scenery, undefiled by war, and the freshness of the river, made this
spot doubly delightful. Raymond felt no relief, received no pleasure
from any show of heaven or earth. He often left Perdita, to wander in
the grounds alone; or in a light shallop he floated idly on the pure
waters, musing deeply. Sometimes I joined him; at such times his
countenance was invariably solemn, his air dejected. He seemed relieved
on seeing me, and would talk with some degree of interest on the
affairs of the day. There was evidently something behind all this; yet,
when he appeared about to speak of that which was nearest his heart, he
would abruptly turn away, and with a sigh endeavour to deliver the
painful idea to the winds.

It had often occurred, that, when, as I said, Raymond quitted Perdita’s
drawing-room, Clara came up to me, and gently drawing me aside, said,
“Papa is gone; shall we go to him? I dare say he will be glad to see
you.” And, as accident permitted, I complied with or refused her
request. One evening a numerous assembly of Greek chieftains were
gathered together in the palace. The intriguing Palli, the accomplished
Karazza, the warlike Ypsilanti, were among the principal. They talked
of the events of the day; the skirmish at noon; the diminished numbers
of the Infidels; their defeat and flight: they contemplated, after a
short interval of time, the capture of the Golden City. They
endeavoured to picture forth what would then happen, and spoke in lofty
terms of the prosperity of Greece, when Constantinople should become
its capital. The conversation then reverted to Asiatic intelligence,
and the ravages the plague made in its chief cities; conjectures were
hazarded as to the progress that disease might have made in the
besieged city.

Raymond had joined in the former part of the discussion. In lively
terms he demonstrated the extremities to which Constantinople was
reduced; the wasted and haggard, though ferocious appearance of the
troops; famine and pestilence was at work for them, he observed, and
the infidels would soon be obliged to take refuge in their only
hope—submission. Suddenly in the midst of his harangue he broke off, as
if stung by some painful thought; he rose uneasily, and I perceived him
at length quit the hall, and through the long corridor seek the open
air. He did not return; and soon Clara crept round to me, making the
accustomed invitation. I consented to her request, and taking her
little hand, followed Raymond. We found him just about to embark in his
boat, and he readily agreed to receive us as companions. After the
heats of the day, the cooling land-breeze ruffled the river, and filled
our little sail. The city looked dark to the south, while numerous
lights along the near shores, and the beautiful aspect of the banks
reposing in placid night, the waters keenly reflecting the heavenly
lights, gave to this beauteous river a dower of loveliness that might
have characterized a retreat in Paradise. Our single boatman attended
to the sail; Raymond steered; Clara sat at his feet, clasping his knees
with her arms, and laying her head on them. Raymond began the
conversation somewhat abruptly.

“This, my friend, is probably the last time we shall have an
opportunity of conversing freely; my plans are now in full operation,
and my time will become more and more occupied. Besides, I wish at once
to tell you my wishes and expectations, and then never again to revert
to so painful a subject. First, I must thank you, Lionel, for having
remained here at my request. Vanity first prompted me to ask you:
vanity, I call it; yet even in this I see the hand of fate—your
presence will soon be necessary; you will become the last resource of
Perdita, her protector and consoler. You will take her back to
Windsor.”—

“Not without you,” I said. “You do not mean to separate again?”

“Do not deceive yourself,” replied Raymond, “the separation at hand is
one over which I have no control; most near at hand is it; the days are
already counted. May I trust you? For many days I have longed to
disclose the mysterious presentiments that weigh on me, although I fear
that you will ridicule them. Yet do not, my gentle friend; for, all
childish and unwise as they are, they have become a part of me, and I
dare not expect to shake them off.

“Yet how can I expect you to sympathize with me? You are of this world;
I am not. You hold forth your hand; it is even as a part of yourself;
and you do not yet divide the feeling of identity from the mortal form
that shapes forth Lionel. How then can you understand me? Earth is to
me a tomb, the firmament a vault, shrouding mere corruption. Time is no
more, for I have stepped within the threshold of eternity; each man I
meet appears a corse, which will soon be deserted of its animating
spark, on the eve of decay and corruption.

Cada piedra un piramide levanta,
y cada flor costruye un monumento,
cada edificio es un sepulcro altivo,
cada soldado un esqueleto vivo.”[3]


His accent was mournful,—he sighed deeply. “A few months ago,” he
continued, “I was thought to be dying; but life was strong within me.
My affections were human; hope and love were the day-stars of my life.
Now— they dream that the brows of the conqueror of the infidel faith
are about to be encircled by triumphant laurel; they talk of honourable
reward, of title, power, and wealth—all I ask of Greece is a grave. Let
them raise a mound above my lifeless body, which may stand even when
the dome of St. Sophia has fallen.

“Wherefore do I feel thus? At Rodosto I was full of hope; but when
first I saw Constantinople, that feeling, with every other joyful one,
departed. The last words of Evadne were the seal upon the warrant of my
death. Yet I do not pretend to account for my mood by any particular
event. All I can say is, that it is so. The plague I am told is in
Constantinople, perhaps I have imbibed its effluvia—perhaps disease is
the real cause of my prognostications. It matters little why or
wherefore I am affected, no power can avert the stroke, and the shadow
of Fate’s uplifted hand already darkens me.

“To you, Lionel, I entrust your sister and her child. Never mention to
her the fatal name of Evadne. She would doubly sorrow over the strange
link that enchains me to her, making my spirit obey her dying voice,
following her, as it is about to do, to the unknown country.”

I listened to him with wonder; but that his sad demeanour and solemn
utterance assured me of the truth and intensity of his feelings, I
should with light derision have attempted to dissipate his fears.
Whatever I was about to reply, was interrupted by the powerful emotions
of Clara. Raymond had spoken, thoughtless of her presence, and she,
poor child, heard with terror and faith the prophecy of his death. Her
father was moved by her violent grief; he took her in his arms and
soothed her, but his very soothings were solemn and fearful. “Weep not,
sweet child,” said he, “the coming death of one you have hardly known.
I may die, but in death I can never forget or desert my own Clara. In
after sorrow or joy, believe that you father’s spirit is near, to save
or sympathize with you. Be proud of me, and cherish your infant
remembrance of me. Thus, sweetest, I shall not appear to die. One thing
you must promise,—not to speak to any one but your uncle, of the
conversation you have just overheard. When I am gone, you will console
your mother, and tell her that death was only bitter because it divided
me from her; that my last thoughts will be spent on her. But while I
live, promise not to betray me; promise, my child.”

With faltering accents Clara promised, while she still clung to her
father in a transport of sorrow. Soon we returned to shore, and I
endeavoured to obviate the impression made on the child’s mind, by
treating Raymond’s fears lightly. We heard no more of them; for, as he
had said, the siege, now drawing to a conclusion, became paramount in
interest, engaging all his time and attention.

The empire of the Mahometans in Europe was at its close. The Greek
fleet blockading every port of Stamboul, prevented the arrival of
succour from Asia; all egress on the side towards land had become
impracticable, except to such desperate sallies, as reduced the numbers
of the enemy without making any impression on our lines. The garrison
was now so much diminished, that it was evident that the city could
easily have been carried by storm; but both humanity and policy
dictated a slower mode of proceeding. We could hardly doubt that, if
pursued to the utmost, its palaces, its temples and store of wealth
would be destroyed in the fury of contending triumph and defeat.
Already the defenceless citizens had suffered through the barbarity of
the Janisaries; and, in time of storm, tumult and massacre, beauty,
infancy and decrepitude, would have alike been sacrificed to the brutal
ferocity of the soldiers. Famine and blockade were certain means of
conquest; and on these we founded our hopes of victory.

Each day the soldiers of the garrison assaulted our advanced posts, and
impeded the accomplishment of our works. Fire-boats were launched from
the various ports, while our troops sometimes recoiled from the devoted
courage of men who did not seek to live, but to sell their lives
dearly. These contests were aggravated by the season: they took place
during summer, when the southern Asiatic wind came laden with
intolerable heat, when the streams were dried up in their shallow beds,
and the vast basin of the sea appeared to glow under the unmitigated
rays of the solsticial sun. Nor did night refresh the earth. Dew was
denied; herbage and flowers there were none; the very trees drooped;
and summer assumed the blighted appearance of winter, as it went forth
in silence and flame to abridge the means of sustenance to man. In vain
did the eye strive to find the wreck of some northern cloud in the
stainless empyrean, which might bring hope of change and moisture to
the oppressive and windless atmosphere. All was serene, burning,
annihilating. We the besiegers were in the comparison little affected
by these evils. The woods around afforded us shade,—the river secured
to us a constant supply of water; nay, detachments were employed in
furnishing the army with ice, which had been laid up on Haemus, and
Athos, and the mountains of Macedonia, while cooling fruits and
wholesome food renovated the strength of the labourers, and made us
bear with less impatience the weight of the unrefreshing air. But in
the city things wore a different face. The sun’s rays were refracted
from the pavement and buildings—the stoppage of the public
fountains—the bad quality of the food, and scarcity even of that,
produced a state of suffering, which was aggravated by the scourge of
disease; while the garrison arrogated every superfluity to themselves,
adding by waste and riot to the necessary evils of the time. Still they
would not capitulate.

Suddenly the system of warfare was changed. We experienced no more
assaults; and by night and day we continued our labours unimpeded.
Stranger still, when the troops advanced near the city, the walls were
vacant, and no cannon was pointed against the intruders. When these
circumstances were reported to Raymond, he caused minute observations
to be made as to what was doing within the walls, and when his scouts
returned, reporting only the continued silence and desolation of the
city, he commanded the army to be drawn out before the gates. No one
appeared on the walls; the very portals, though locked and barred,
seemed unguarded; above, the many domes and glittering crescents
pierced heaven; while the old walls, survivors of ages, with
ivy-crowned tower and weed-tangled buttress, stood as rocks in an
uninhabited waste. From within the city neither shout nor cry, nor
aught except the casual howling of a dog, broke the noon-day stillness.
Even our soldiers were awed to silence; the music paused; the clang of
arms was hushed. Each man asked his fellow in whispers, the meaning of
this sudden peace; while Raymond from an height endeavoured, by means
of glasses, to discover and observe the stratagem of the enemy. No form
could be discerned on the terraces of the houses; in the higher parts
of the town no moving shadow bespoke the presence of any living being:
the very trees waved not, and mocked the stability of architecture with
like immovability.

The tramp of horses, distinctly heard in the silence, was at length
discerned. It was a troop sent by Karazza, the Admiral; they bore
dispatches to the Lord General. The contents of these papers were
important. The night before, the watch, on board one of the smaller
vessels anchored near the seraglio wall, was roused by a slight
splashing as of muffled oars; the alarm was given: twelve small boats,
each containing three Janizaries, were descried endeavouring to make
their way through the fleet to the opposite shore of Scutari. When they
found themselves discovered they discharged their muskets, and some
came to the front to cover the others, whose crews, exerting all their
strength, endeavoured to escape with their light barks from among the
dark hulls that environed them. They were in the end all sunk, and,
with the exception of two or three prisoners, the crews drowned. Little
could be got from the survivors; but their cautious answers caused it
to be surmised that several expeditions had preceded this last, and
that several Turks of rank and importance had been conveyed to Asia.
The men disdainfully repelled the idea of having deserted the defence
of their city; and one, the youngest among them, in answer to the taunt
of a sailor, exclaimed, “Take it, Christian dogs! take the palaces, the
gardens, the mosques, the abode of our fathers—take plague with them;
pestilence is the enemy we fly; if she be your friend, hug her to your
bosoms. The curse of Allah is on Stamboul, share ye her fate.”

Such was the account sent by Karazza to Raymond: but a tale full of
monstrous exaggerations, though founded on this, was spread by the
accompanying troop among our soldiers. A murmur arose, the city was the
prey of pestilence; already had a mighty power subjugated the
inhabitants; Death had become lord of Constantinople.

I have heard a picture described, wherein all the inhabitants of earth
were drawn out in fear to stand the encounter of Death. The feeble and
decrepid fled; the warriors retreated, though they threatened even in
flight. Wolves and lions, and various monsters of the desert roared
against him; while the grim Unreality hovered shaking his spectral
dart, a solitary but invincible assailant. Even so was it with the army
of Greece. I am convinced, that had the myriad troops of Asia come from
over the Propontis, and stood defenders of the Golden City, each and
every Greek would have marched against the overwhelming numbers, and
have devoted himself with patriotic fury for his country. But here no
hedge of bayonets opposed itself, no death-dealing artillery, no
formidable array of brave soldiers—the unguarded walls afforded easy
entrance—the vacant palaces luxurious dwellings; but above the dome of
St. Sophia the superstitious Greek saw Pestilence, and shrunk in
trepidation from her influence.

Raymond was actuated by far other feelings. He descended the hill with
a face beaming with triumph, and pointing with his sword to the gates,
commanded his troops to—down with those barricades—the only obstacles
now to completest victory. The soldiers answered his cheerful words
with aghast and awe-struck looks; instinctively they drew back, and
Raymond rode in the front of the lines:—“By my sword I swear,” he
cried, “that no ambush or stratagem endangers you. The enemy is already
vanquished; the pleasant places, the noble dwellings and spoil of the
city are already yours; force the gate; enter and possess the seats of
your ancestors, your own inheritance!”

An universal shudder and fearful whispering passed through the lines;
not a soldier moved. “Cowards!” exclaimed their general, exasperated,
“give me an hatchet! I alone will enter! I will plant your standard;
and when you see it wave from yon highest minaret, you may gain
courage, and rally round it!”

One of the officers now came forward: “General,” he said, “we neither
fear the courage, nor arms, the open attack, nor secret ambush of the
Moslems. We are ready to expose our breasts, exposed ten thousand times
before, to the balls and scymetars of the infidels, and to fall
gloriously for Greece. But we will not die in heaps, like dogs poisoned
in summer-time, by the pestilential air of that city—we dare not go
against the plague!”

A multitude of men are feeble and inert, without a voice, a leader;
give them that, and they regain the strength belonging to their
numbers. Shouts from a thousand voices now rent the air—the cry of
applause became universal. Raymond saw the danger; he was willing to
save his troops from the crime of disobedience; for he knew, that
contention once begun between the commander and his army, each act and
word added to the weakness of the former, and bestowed power on the
latter. He gave orders for the retreat to be sounded, and the regiments
repaired in good order to the camp.

I hastened to carry the intelligence of these strange proceedings to
Perdita; and we were soon joined by Raymond. He looked gloomy and
perturbed. My sister was struck by my narrative: “How beyond the
imagination of man,” she exclaimed, “are the decrees of heaven,
wondrous and inexplicable!”

“Foolish girl,” cried Raymond angrily, “are you like my valiant
soldiers, panic-struck? What is there inexplicable, pray, tell me, in
so very natural an occurrence? Does not the plague rage each year in
Stamboul? What wonder, that this year, when as we are told, its
virulence is unexampled in Asia, that it should have occasioned double
havoc in that city? What wonder then, in time of siege, want, extreme
heat, and drought, that it should make unaccustomed ravages? Less
wonder far is it, that the garrison, despairing of being able to hold
out longer, should take advantage of the negligence of our fleet to
escape at once from siege and capture. It is not pestilence —by the God
that lives! it is not either plague or impending danger that makes us,
like birds in harvest-time, terrified by a scarecrow, abstain from the
ready prey—it is base superstition—And thus the aim of the valiant is
made the shuttlecock of fools; the worthy ambition of the high-souled,
the plaything of these tamed hares! But yet Stamboul shall be ours! By
my past labours, by torture and imprisonment suffered for them, by my
victories, by my sword, I swear—by my hopes of fame, by my former
deserts now awaiting their reward, I deeply vow, with these hands to
plant the cross on yonder mosque!”

“Dearest Raymond!” interrupted Perdita, in a supplicating accent.

He had been walking to and fro in the marble hall of the seraglio; his
very lips were pale with rage, while, quivering, they shaped his angry
words— his eyes shot fire—his gestures seemed restrained by their very
vehemence. “Perdita,” he continued, impatiently, “I know what you would
say; I know that you love me, that you are good and gentle; but this is
no woman’s work—nor can a female heart guess at the hurricane which
tears me!”

He seemed half afraid of his own violence, and suddenly quitted the
hall: a look from Perdita shewed me her distress, and I followed him.
He was pacing the garden: his passions were in a state of inconceivable
turbulence. “Am I for ever,” he cried, “to be the sport of fortune!
Must man, the heaven-climber, be for ever the victim of the crawling
reptiles of his species! Were I as you, Lionel, looking forward to many
years of life, to a succession of love-enlightened days, to refined
enjoyments and fresh-springing hopes, I might yield, and breaking my
General’s staff, seek repose in the glades of Windsor. But I am about
to die!—nay, interrupt me not—soon I shall die. From the many-peopled
earth, from the sympathies of man, from the loved resorts of my youth,
from the kindness of my friends, from the affection of my only beloved
Perdita, I am about to be removed. Such is the will of fate! Such the
decree of the High Ruler from whom there is no appeal: to whom I
submit. But to lose all—to lose with life and love, glory also! It
shall not be!

“I, and in a few brief years, all you,—this panic-struck army, and all
the population of fair Greece, will no longer be. But other generations
will arise, and ever and for ever will continue, to be made happier by
our present acts, to be glorified by our valour. The prayer of my youth
was to be one among those who render the pages of earth’s history
splendid; who exalt the race of man, and make this little globe a
dwelling of the mighty. Alas, for Raymond! the prayer of his youth is
wasted—the hopes of his manhood are null!

“From my dungeon in yonder city I cried, soon I will be thy lord! When
Evadne pronounced my death, I thought that the title of Victor of
Constantinople would be written on my tomb, and I subdued all mortal
fear. I stand before its vanquished walls, and dare not call myself a
conqueror. So shall it not be! Did not Alexander leap from the walls of
the city of the Oxydracae, to shew his coward troops the way to
victory, encountering alone the swords of its defenders? Even so will I
brave the plague—and though no man follow, I will plant the Grecian
standard on the height of St. Sophia.”

Reason came unavailing to such high-wrought feelings. In vain I shewed
him, that when winter came, the cold would dissipate the pestilential
air, and restore courage to the Greeks. “Talk not of other season than
this!” he cried. “I have lived my last winter, and the date of this
year, 2092, will be carved upon my tomb. Already do I see,” he
continued, looking up mournfully, “the bourne and precipitate edge of
my existence, over which I plunge into the gloomy mystery of the life
to come. I am prepared, so that I leave behind a trail of light so
radiant, that my worst enemies cannot cloud it. I owe this to Greece,
to you, to my surviving Perdita, and to myself, the victim of
ambition.”

We were interrupted by an attendant, who announced, that the staff of
Raymond was assembled in the council-chamber. He requested me in the
meantime to ride through the camp, and to observe and report to him the
dispositions of the soldiers; he then left me. I had been excited to
the utmost by the proceedings of the day, and now more than ever by the
passionate language of Raymond. Alas! for human reason! He accused the
Greeks of superstition: what name did he give to the faith he lent to
the predictions of Evadne? I passed from the palace of Sweet Waters to
the plain on which the encampment lay, and found its inhabitants in
commotion. The arrival of several with fresh stories of marvels, from
the fleet; the exaggerations bestowed on what was already known; tales
of old prophecies, of fearful histories of whole regions which had been
laid waste during the present year by pestilence, alarmed and occupied
the troops. Discipline was lost; the army disbanded itself. Each
individual, before a part of a great whole moving only in unison with
others, now became resolved into the unit nature had made him, and
thought of himself only. They stole off at first by ones and twos, then
in larger companies, until, unimpeded by the officers, whole battalions
sought the road that led to Macedonia.

About midnight I returned to the palace and sought Raymond; he was
alone, and apparently composed; such composure, at least, was his as is
inspired by a resolve to adhere to a certain line of conduct. He heard
my account of the self-dissolution of the army with calmness, and then
said, “You know, Verney, my fixed determination not to quit this place,
until in the light of day Stamboul is confessedly ours. If the men I
have about me shrink from following me, others, more courageous, are to
be found. Go you before break of day, bear these dispatches to Karazza,
add to them your own entreaties that he send me his marines and naval
force; if I can get but one regiment to second me, the rest would
follow of course. Let him send me this regiment. I shall expect your
return by to-morrow noon.”

Methought this was but a poor expedient; but I assured him of my
obedience and zeal. I quitted him to take a few hours rest. With the
breaking of morning I was accoutred for my ride. I lingered awhile,
desirous of taking leave of Perdita, and from my window observed the
approach of the sun. The golden splendour arose, and weary nature awoke
to suffer yet another day of heat and thirsty decay. No flowers lifted
up their dew-laden cups to meet the dawn; the dry grass had withered on
the plains; the burning fields of air were vacant of birds; the cicale
alone, children of the sun, began their shrill and deafening song among
the cypresses and olives. I saw Raymond’s coal-black charger brought to
the palace gate; a small company of officers arrived soon after; care
and fear was painted on each cheek, and in each eye, unrefreshed by
sleep. I found Raymond and Perdita together. He was watching the rising
sun, while with one arm he encircled his beloved’s waist; she looked on
him, the sun of her life, with earnest gaze of mingled anxiety and
tenderness. Raymond started angrily when he saw me. “Here still?” he
cried. “Is this your promised zeal?”

“Pardon me,” I said, “but even as you speak, I am gone.”

“Nay, pardon me,” he replied; “I have no right to command or reproach;
but my life hangs on your departure and speedy return. Farewell!”

His voice had recovered its bland tone, but a dark cloud still hung on
his features. I would have delayed; I wished to recommend watchfulness
to Perdita, but his presence restrained me. I had no pretence for my
hesitation; and on his repeating his farewell, I clasped his
outstretched hand; it was cold and clammy. “Take care of yourself, my
dear Lord,” I said.

“Nay,” said Perdita, “that task shall be mine. Return speedily,
Lionel.” With an air of absence he was playing with her auburn locks,
while she leaned on him; twice I turned back, only to look again on
this matchless pair. At last, with slow and heavy steps, I had paced
out of the hall, and sprung upon my horse. At that moment Clara flew
towards me; clasping my knee she cried, “Make haste back, uncle! Dear
uncle, I have such fearful dreams; I dare not tell my mother. Do not be
long away!” I assured her of my impatience to return, and then, with a
small escort rode along the plain towards the tower of Marmora.

I fulfilled my commission; I saw Karazza. He was somewhat surprised; he
would see, he said, what could be done; but it required time; and
Raymond had ordered me to return by noon. It was impossible to effect
any thing in so short a time. I must stay till the next day; or come
back, after having reported the present state of things to the general.
My choice was easily made. A restlessness, a fear of what was about to
betide, a doubt as to Raymond’s purposes, urged me to return without
delay to his quarters. Quitting the Seven Towers, I rode eastward
towards the Sweet Waters. I took a circuitous path, principally for the
sake of going to the top of the mount before mentioned, which commanded
a view of the city. I had my glass with me. The city basked under the
noon-day sun, and the venerable walls formed its picturesque boundary.
Immediately before me was the Top Kapou, the gate near which Mahomet
had made the breach by which he entered the city. Trees gigantic and
aged grew near; before the gate I discerned a crowd of moving human
figures—with intense curiosity I lifted my glass to my eye. I saw Lord
Raymond on his charger; a small company of officers had gathered about
him; and behind was a promiscuous concourse of soldiers and subalterns,
their discipline lost, their arms thrown aside; no music sounded, no
banners streamed. The only flag among them was one which Raymond
carried; he pointed with it to the gate of the city. The circle round
him fell back. With angry gestures he leapt from his horse, and seizing
a hatchet that hung from his saddle-bow, went with the apparent
intention of battering down the opposing gate. A few men came to aid
him; their numbers increased; under their united blows the obstacle was
vanquished, gate, portcullis, and fence were demolished; and the wide
sun-lit way, leading to the heart of the city, now lay open before
them. The men shrank back; they seemed afraid of what they had already
done, and stood as if they expected some Mighty Phantom to stalk in
offended majesty from the opening. Raymond sprung lightly on his horse,
grasped the standard, and with words which I could not hear (but his
gestures, being their fit accompaniment, were marked by passionate
energy,) he seemed to adjure their assistance and companionship; even
as he spoke, the crowd receded from him. Indignation now transported
him; his words I guessed were fraught with disdain—then turning from
his coward followers, he addressed himself to enter the city alone. His
very horse seemed to back from the fatal entrance; his dog, his
faithful dog, lay moaning and supplicating in his path—in a moment
more, he had plunged the rowels into the sides of the stung animal, who
bounded forward, and he, the gateway passed, was galloping up the broad
and desart street.

Until this moment my soul had been in my eyes only. I had gazed with
wonder, mixed with fear and enthusiasm. The latter feeling now
predominated. I forgot the distance between us: “I will go with thee,
Raymond!” I cried; but, my eye removed from the glass, I could scarce
discern the pigmy forms of the crowd, which about a mile from me
surrounded the gate; the form of Raymond was lost. Stung with
impatience, I urged my horse with force of spur and loosened reins down
the acclivity, that, before danger could arrive, I might be at the side
of my noble, godlike friend. A number of buildings and trees
intervened, when I had reached the plain, hiding the city from my view.
But at that moment a crash was heard. Thunderlike it reverberated
through the sky, while the air was darkened. A moment more and the old
walls again met my sight, while over them hovered a murky cloud;
fragments of buildings whirled above, half seen in smoke, while flames
burst out beneath, and continued explosions filled the air with
terrific thunders. Flying from the mass of falling ruin which leapt
over the high walls, and shook the ivy towers, a crowd of soldiers made
for the road by which I came; I was surrounded, hemmed in by them,
unable to get forward. My impatience rose to its utmost; I stretched
out my hands to the men; I conjured them to turn back and save their
General, the conqueror of Stamboul, the liberator of Greece; tears, aye
tears, in warm flow gushed from my eyes—I would not believe in his
destruction; yet every mass that darkened the air seemed to bear with
it a portion of the martyred Raymond. Horrible sights were shaped to me
in the turbid cloud that hovered over the city; and my only relief was
derived from the struggles I made to approach the gate. Yet when I
effected my purpose, all I could discern within the precincts of the
massive walls was a city of fire: the open way through which Raymond
had ridden was enveloped in smoke and flame. After an interval the
explosions ceased, but the flames still shot up from various quarters;
the dome of St. Sophia had disappeared. Strange to say (the result
perhaps of the concussion of air occasioned by the blowing up of the
city) huge, white thunder clouds lifted themselves up from the southern
horizon, and gathered over-head; they were the first blots on the blue
expanse that I had seen for months, and amidst this havoc and despair
they inspired pleasure. The vault above became obscured, lightning
flashed from the heavy masses, followed instantaneously by crashing
thunder; then the big rain fell. The flames of the city bent beneath
it; and the smoke and dust arising from the ruins was dissipated.

I no sooner perceived an abatement of the flames than, hurried on by an
irresistible impulse, I endeavoured to penetrate the town. I could only
do this on foot, as the mass of ruin was impracticable for a horse. I
had never entered the city before, and its ways were unknown to me. The
streets were blocked up, the ruins smoking; I climbed up one heap, only
to view others in succession; and nothing told me where the centre of
the town might be, or towards what point Raymond might have directed
his course. The rain ceased; the clouds sunk behind the horizon; it was
now evening, and the sun descended swiftly the western sky. I scrambled
on, until I came to a street, whose wooden houses, half-burnt, had been
cooled by the rain, and were fortunately uninjured by the gunpowder. Up
this I hurried—until now I had not seen a vestige of man. Yet none of
the defaced human forms which I distinguished, could be Raymond; so I
turned my eyes away, while my heart sickened within me. I came to an
open space—a mountain of ruin in the midst, announced that some large
mosque had occupied the space—and here, scattered about, I saw various
articles of luxury and wealth, singed, destroyed—but shewing what they
had been in their ruin—jewels, strings of pearls, embroidered robes,
rich furs, glittering tapestries, and oriental ornaments, seemed to
have been collected here in a pile destined for destruction; but the
rain had stopped the havoc midway.

Hours passed, while in this scene of ruin I sought for Raymond.
Insurmountable heaps sometimes opposed themselves; the still burning
fires scorched me. The sun set; the atmosphere grew dim—and the evening
star no longer shone companionless. The glare of flames attested the
progress of destruction, while, during mingled light and obscurity, the
piles around me took gigantic proportions and weird shapes. For a
moment I could yield to the creative power of the imagination, and for
a moment was soothed by the sublime fictions it presented to me. The
beatings of my human heart drew me back to blank reality. Where, in
this wilderness of death, art thou, O Raymond—ornament of England,
deliverer of Greece, “hero of unwritten story,” where in this burning
chaos are thy dear relics strewed? I called aloud for him—through the
darkness of night, over the scorching ruins of fallen Constantinople,
his name was heard; no voice replied—echo even was mute.

I was overcome by weariness; the solitude depressed my spirits. The
sultry air impregnated with dust, the heat and smoke of burning
palaces, palsied my limbs. Hunger suddenly came acutely upon me. The
excitement which had hitherto sustained me was lost; as a building,
whose props are loosened, and whose foundations rock, totters and
falls, so when enthusiasm and hope deserted me, did my strength fail. I
sat on the sole remaining step of an edifice, which even in its
downfall, was huge and magnificent; a few broken walls, not dislodged
by gunpowder, stood in fantastic groupes, and a flame glimmered at
intervals on the summit of the pile. For a time hunger and sleep
contended, till the constellations reeled before my eyes and then were
lost. I strove to rise, but my heavy lids closed, my limbs
over-wearied, claimed repose—I rested my head on the stone, I yielded
to the grateful sensation of utter forgetfulness; and in that scene of
desolation, on that night of despair—I slept.

 [3] Calderon de la Barca.




CHAPTER III.


The stars still shone brightly when I awoke, and Taurus high in the
southern heaven shewed that it was midnight. I awoke from disturbed
dreams. Methought I had been invited to Timon’s last feast; I came with
keen appetite, the covers were removed, the hot water sent up its
unsatisfying steams, while I fled before the anger of the host, who
assumed the form of Raymond; while to my diseased fancy, the vessels
hurled by him after me, were surcharged with fetid vapour, and my
friend’s shape, altered by a thousand distortions, expanded into a
gigantic phantom, bearing on its brow the sign of pestilence. The
growing shadow rose and rose, filling, and then seeming to endeavour to
burst beyond, the adamantine vault that bent over, sustaining and
enclosing the world. The night-mare became torture; with a strong
effort I threw off sleep, and recalled reason to her wonted functions.
My first thought was Perdita; to her I must return; her I must support,
drawing such food from despair as might best sustain her wounded heart;
recalling her from the wild excesses of grief, by the austere laws of
duty, and the soft tenderness of regret.

The position of the stars was my only guide. I turned from the awful
ruin of the Golden City, and, after great exertion, succeeded in
extricating myself from its enclosure. I met a company of soldiers
outside the walls; I borrowed a horse from one of them, and hastened to
my sister. The appearance of the plain was changed during this short
interval; the encampment was broken up; the relics of the disbanded
army met in small companies here and there; each face was clouded;
every gesture spoke astonishment and dismay.

With an heavy heart I entered the palace, and stood fearful to advance,
to speak, to look. In the midst of the hall was Perdita; she sat on the
marble pavement, her head fallen on her bosom, her hair dishevelled,
her fingers twined busily one within the other; she was pale as marble,
and every feature was contracted by agony. She perceived me, and looked
up enquiringly; her half glance of hope was misery; the words died
before I could articulate them; I felt a ghastly smile wrinkle my lips.
She understood my gesture; again her head fell; again her fingers
worked restlessly. At last I recovered speech, but my voice terrified
her; the hapless girl had understood my look, and for worlds she would
not that the tale of her heavy misery should have been shaped out and
confirmed by hard, irrevocable words. Nay, she seemed to wish to
distract my thoughts from the subject: she rose from the floor: “Hush!”
she said, whisperingly; “after much weeping, Clara sleeps; we must not
disturb her.” She seated herself then on the same ottoman where I had
left her in the morning resting on the beating heart of her Raymond; I
dared not approach her, but sat at a distant corner, watching her
starting and nervous gestures. At length, in an abrupt manner she
asked, “Where is he?”

“O, fear not,” she continued, “fear not that I should entertain hope!
Yet tell me, have you found him? To have him once more in my arms, to
see him, however changed, is all I desire. Though Constantinople be
heaped above him as a tomb, yet I must find him—then cover us with the
city’s weight, with a mountain piled above—I care not, so that one
grave hold Raymond and his Perdita.” Then weeping, she clung to me:
“Take me to him,” she cried, “unkind Lionel, why do you keep me here?
Of myself I cannot find him —but you know where he lies—lead me
thither.”

At first these agonizing plaints filled me with intolerable compassion.
But soon I endeavoured to extract patience for her from the ideas she
suggested. I related my adventures of the night, my endeavours to find
our lost one, and my disappointment. Turning her thoughts this way, I
gave them an object which rescued them from insanity. With apparent
calmness she discussed with me the probable spot where he might be
found, and planned the means we should use for that purpose. Then
hearing of my fatigue and abstinence, she herself brought me food. I
seized the favourable moment, and endeavoured to awaken in her
something beyond the killing torpor of grief. As I spoke, my subject
carried me away; deep admiration; grief, the offspring of truest
affection, the overflowing of a heart bursting with sympathy for all
that had been great and sublime in the career of my friend, inspired me
as I poured forth the praises of Raymond.

“Alas, for us,” I cried, “who have lost this latest honour of the
world! Beloved Raymond! He is gone to the nations of the dead; he has
become one of those, who render the dark abode of the obscure grave
illustrious by dwelling there. He has journied on the road that leads
to it, and joined the mighty of soul who went before him. When the
world was in its infancy death must have been terrible, and man left
his friends and kindred to dwell, a solitary stranger, in an unknown
country. But now, he who dies finds many companions gone before to
prepare for his reception. The great of past ages people it, the
exalted hero of our own days is counted among its inhabitants, while
life becomes doubly ‘the desart and the solitude.’

“What a noble creature was Raymond, the first among the men of our
time. By the grandeur of his conceptions, the graceful daring of his
actions, by his wit and beauty, he won and ruled the minds of all. Of
one only fault he might have been accused; but his death has cancelled
that. I have heard him called inconstant of purpose—when he deserted,
for the sake of love, the hope of sovereignty, and when he abdicated
the protectorship of England, men blamed his infirmity of purpose. Now
his death has crowned his life, and to the end of time it will be
remembered, that he devoted himself, a willing victim, to the glory of
Greece. Such was his choice: he expected to die. He foresaw that he
should leave this cheerful earth, the lightsome sky, and thy love,
Perdita; yet he neither hesitated or turned back, going right onward to
his mark of fame. While the earth lasts, his actions will be recorded
with praise. Grecian maidens will in devotion strew flowers on his
tomb, and make the air around it resonant with patriotic hymns, in
which his name will find high record.”

I saw the features of Perdita soften; the sternness of grief yielded to
tenderness—I continued:—“Thus to honour him, is the sacred duty of his
survivors. To make his name even as an holy spot of ground, enclosing
it from all hostile attacks by our praise, shedding on it the blossoms
of love and regret, guarding it from decay, and bequeathing it
untainted to posterity. Such is the duty of his friends. A dearer one
belongs to you, Perdita, mother of his child. Do you remember in her
infancy, with what transport you beheld Clara, recognizing in her the
united being of yourself and Raymond; joying to view in this living
temple a manifestation of your eternal loves. Even such is she still.
You say that you have lost Raymond. O, no!—yet he lives with you and in
you there. From him she sprung, flesh of his flesh, bone of his
bone—and not, as heretofore, are you content to trace in her downy
cheek and delicate limbs, an affinity to Raymond, but in her
enthusiastic affections, in the sweet qualities of her mind, you may
still find him living, the good, the great, the beloved. Be it your
care to foster this similarity—be it your care to render her worthy of
him, so that, when she glory in her origin, she take not shame for what
she is.”

I could perceive that, when I recalled my sister’s thoughts to her
duties in life, she did not listen with the same patience as before.
She appeared to suspect a plan of consolation on my part, from which
she, cherishing her new-born grief, revolted. “You talk of the future,”
she said, “while the present is all to me. Let me find the earthly
dwelling of my beloved; let us rescue that from common dust, so that in
times to come men may point to the sacred tomb, and name it his—then to
other thoughts, and a new course of life, or what else fate, in her
cruel tyranny, may have marked out for me.”

After a short repose I prepared to leave her, that I might endeavour to
accomplish her wish. In the mean time we were joined by Clara, whose
pallid cheek and scared look shewed the deep impression grief had made
on her young mind. She seemed to be full of something to which she
could not give words; but, seizing an opportunity afforded by Perdita’s
absence, she preferred to me an earnest prayer, that I would take her
within view of the gate at which her father had entered Constantinople.
She promised to commit no extravagance, to be docile, and immediately
to return. I could not refuse; for Clara was not an ordinary child; her
sensibility and intelligence seemed already to have endowed her with
the rights of womanhood. With her therefore, before me on my horse,
attended only by the servant who was to re-conduct her, we rode to the
Top Kapou. We found a party of soldiers gathered round it. They were
listening. “They are human cries,” said one: “More like the howling of
a dog,” replied another; and again they bent to catch the sound of
regular distant moans, which issued from the precincts of the ruined
city. “That, Clara,” I said, “is the gate, that the street which
yestermorn your father rode up.” Whatever Clara’s intention had been in
asking to be brought hither, it was balked by the presence of the
soldiers. With earnest gaze she looked on the labyrinth of smoking
piles which had been a city, and then expressed her readiness to return
home. At this moment a melancholy howl struck on our ears; it was
repeated; “Hark!” cried Clara, “he is there; that is Florio, my
father’s dog.” It seemed to me impossible that she could recognise the
sound, but she persisted in her assertion till she gained credit with
the crowd about. At least it would be a benevolent action to rescue the
sufferer, whether human or brute, from the desolation of the town; so,
sending Clara back to her home, I again entered Constantinople.
Encouraged by the impunity attendant on my former visit, several
soldiers who had made a part of Raymond’s body guard, who had loved
him, and sincerely mourned his loss, accompanied me.

It is impossible to conjecture the strange enchainment of events which
restored the lifeless form of my friend to our hands. In that part of
the town where the fire had most raged the night before, and which now
lay quenched, black and cold, the dying dog of Raymond crouched beside
the mutilated form of its lord. At such a time sorrow has no voice;
affliction, tamed by its very vehemence, is mute. The poor animal
recognised me, licked my hand, crept close to its lord, and died. He
had been evidently thrown from his horse by some falling ruin, which
had crushed his head, and defaced his whole person. I bent over the
body, and took in my hand the edge of his cloak, less altered in
appearance than the human frame it clothed. I pressed it to my lips,
while the rough soldiers gathered around, mourning over this worthiest
prey of death, as if regret and endless lamentation could re-illumine
the extinguished spark, or call to its shattered prison-house of flesh
the liberated spirit. Yesterday those limbs were worth an universe;
they then enshrined a transcendant power, whose intents, words, and
actions were worthy to be recorded in letters of gold; now the
superstition of affection alone could give value to the shattered
mechanism, which, incapable and clod-like, no more resembled Raymond,
than the fallen rain is like the former mansion of cloud in which it
climbed the highest skies, and gilded by the sun, attracted all eyes,
and satiated the sense by its excess of beauty.

Such as he had now become, such as was his terrene vesture, defaced and
spoiled, we wrapt it in our cloaks, and lifting the burthen in our
arms, bore it from this city of the dead. The question arose as to
where we should deposit him. In our road to the palace, we passed
through the Greek cemetery; here on a tablet of black marble I caused
him to be laid; the cypresses waved high above, their death-like gloom
accorded with his state of nothingness. We cut branches of the funereal
trees and placed them over him, and on these again his sword. I left a
guard to protect this treasure of dust; and ordered perpetual torches
to be burned around.

When I returned to Perdita, I found that she had already been informed
of the success of my undertaking. He, her beloved, the sole and eternal
object of her passionate tenderness, was restored her. Such was the
maniac language of her enthusiasm. What though those limbs moved not,
and those lips could no more frame modulated accents of wisdom and
love! What though like a weed flung from the fruitless sea, he lay the
prey of corruption— still that was the form she had caressed, those the
lips that meeting hers, had drank the spirit of love from the
commingling breath; that was the earthly mechanism of dissoluble clay
she had called her own. True, she looked forward to another life; true,
the burning spirit of love seemed to her unextinguishable throughout
eternity. Yet at this time, with human fondness, she clung to all that
her human senses permitted her to see and feel to be a part of Raymond.

Pale as marble, clear and beaming as that, she heard my tale, and
enquired concerning the spot where he had been deposited. Her features
had lost the distortion of grief; her eyes were brightened, her very
person seemed dilated; while the excessive whiteness and even
transparency of her skin, and something hollow in her voice, bore
witness that not tranquillity, but excess of excitement, occasioned the
treacherous calm that settled on her countenance. I asked her where he
should be buried. She replied, “At Athens; even at the Athens which he
loved. Without the town, on the acclivity of Hymettus, there is a rocky
recess which he pointed out to me as the spot where he would wish to
repose.”

My own desire certainly was that he should not be removed from the spot
where he now lay. But her wish was of course to be complied with; and I
entreated her to prepare without delay for our departure.

Behold now the melancholy train cross the flats of Thrace, and wind
through the defiles, and over the mountains of Macedonia, coast the
clear waves of the Peneus, cross the Larissean plain, pass the straits
of Thermopylae, and ascending in succession Œrta and Parnassus, descend
to the fertile plain of Athens. Women bear with resignation these long
drawn ills, but to a man’s impatient spirit, the slow motion of our
cavalcade, the melancholy repose we took at noon, the perpetual
presence of the pall, gorgeous though it was, that wrapt the rifled
casket which had contained Raymond, the monotonous recurrence of day
and night, unvaried by hope or change, all the circumstances of our
march were intolerable. Perdita, shut up in herself, spoke little. Her
carriage was closed; and, when we rested, she sat leaning her pale
cheek on her white cold hand, with eyes fixed on the ground, indulging
thoughts which refused communication or sympathy.

We descended from Parnassus, emerging from its many folds, and passed
through Livadia on our road to Attica. Perdita would not enter Athens;
but reposing at Marathon on the night of our arrival, conducted me on
the following day, to the spot selected by her as the treasure house of
Raymond’s dear remains. It was in a recess near the head of the ravine
to the south of Hymettus. The chasm, deep, black, and hoary, swept from
the summit to the base; in the fissures of the rock myrtle underwood
grew and wild thyme, the food of many nations of bees; enormous crags
protruded into the cleft, some beetling over, others rising
perpendicularly from it. At the foot of this sublime chasm, a fertile
laughing valley reached from sea to sea, and beyond was spread the blue
Aegean, sprinkled with islands, the light waves glancing beneath the
sun. Close to the spot on which we stood, was a solitary rock, high and
conical, which, divided on every side from the mountain, seemed a
nature-hewn pyramid; with little labour this block was reduced to a
perfect shape; the narrow cell was scooped out beneath in which Raymond
was placed, and a short inscription, carved in the living stone,
recorded the name of its tenant, the cause and aera of his death.

Every thing was accomplished with speed under my directions. I agreed
to leave the finishing and guardianship of the tomb to the head of the
religious establishment at Athens, and by the end of October prepared
for my return to England. I mentioned this to Perdita. It was painful
to appear to drag her from the last scene that spoke of her lost one;
but to linger here was vain, and my very soul was sick with its
yearning to rejoin my Idris and her babes. In reply, my sister
requested me to accompany her the following evening to the tomb of
Raymond. Some days had passed since I had visited the spot. The path to
it had been enlarged, and steps hewn in the rock led us less
circuitously than before, to the spot itself; the platform on which the
pyramid stood was enlarged, and looking towards the south, in a recess
overshadowed by the straggling branches of a wild fig-tree, I saw
foundations dug, and props and rafters fixed, evidently the
commencement of a cottage; standing on its unfinished threshold, the
tomb was at our right-hand, the whole ravine, and plain, and azure sea
immediately before us; the dark rocks received a glow from the
descending sun, which glanced along the cultivated valley, and dyed in
purple and orange the placid waves; we sat on a rocky elevation, and I
gazed with rapture on the beauteous panorama of living and changeful
colours, which varied and enhanced the graces of earth and ocean.

“Did I not do right,” said Perdita, “in having my loved one conveyed
hither? Hereafter this will be the cynosure of Greece. In such a spot
death loses half its terrors, and even the inanimate dust appears to
partake of the spirit of beauty which hallows this region. Lionel, he
sleeps there; that is the grave of Raymond, he whom in my youth I first
loved; whom my heart accompanied in days of separation and anger; to
whom I am now joined for ever. Never—mark me—never will I leave this
spot. Methinks his spirit remains here as well as that dust, which,
uncommunicable though it be, is more precious in its nothingness than
aught else widowed earth clasps to her sorrowing bosom. The myrtle
bushes, the thyme, the little cyclamen, which peep from the fissures of
the rock, all the produce of the place, bear affinity to him; the light
that invests the hills participates in his essence, and sky and
mountains, sea and valley, are imbued by the presence of his spirit. I
will live and die here!

“Go you to England, Lionel; return to sweet Idris and dearest Adrian;
return, and let my orphan girl be as a child of your own in your house.
Look on me as dead; and truly if death be a mere change of state, I am
dead. This is another world, from that which late I inhabited, from
that which is now your home. Here I hold communion only with the has
been, and to come. Go you to England, and leave me where alone I can
consent to drag out the miserable days which I must still live.”

A shower of tears terminated her sad harangue. I had expected some
extravagant proposition, and remained silent awhile, collecting my
thoughts that I might the better combat her fanciful scheme. “You
cherish dreary thoughts, my dear Perdita,” I said, “nor do I wonder
that for a time your better reason should be influenced by passionate
grief and a disturbed imagination. Even I am in love with this last
home of Raymond’s; nevertheless we must quit it.”

“I expected this,” cried Perdita; “I supposed that you would treat me
as a mad, foolish girl. But do not deceive yourself; this cottage is
built by my order; and here I shall remain, until the hour arrives when
I may share his happier dwelling.”

“My dearest girl!”

“And what is there so strange in my design? I might have deceived you;
I might have talked of remaining here only a few months; in your
anxiety to reach Windsor you would have left me, and without reproach
or contention, I might have pursued my plan. But I disdained the
artifice; or rather in my wretchedness it was my only consolation to
pour out my heart to you, my brother, my only friend. You will not
dispute with me? You know how wilful your poor, misery-stricken sister
is. Take my girl with you; wean her from sights and thoughts of sorrow;
let infantine hilarity revisit her heart, and animate her eyes; so
could it never be, were she near me; it is far better for all of you
that you should never see me again. For myself, I will not voluntarily
seek death, that is, I will not, while I can command myself; and I can
here. But drag me from this country; and my power of self control
vanishes, nor can I answer for the violence my agony of grief may lead
me to commit.”

“You clothe your meaning, Perdita,” I replied, “in powerful words, yet
that meaning is selfish and unworthy of you. You have often agreed with
me that there is but one solution to the intricate riddle of life; to
improve ourselves, and contribute to the happiness of others: and now,
in the very prime of life, you desert your principles, and shut
yourself up in useless solitude. Will you think of Raymond less at
Windsor, the scene of your early happiness? Will you commune less with
his departed spirit, while you watch over and cultivate the rare
excellence of his child? You have been sadly visited; nor do I wonder
that a feeling akin to insanity should drive you to bitter and
unreasonable imaginings. But a home of love awaits you in your native
England. My tenderness and affection must soothe you; the society of
Raymond’s friends will be of more solace than these dreary
speculations. We will all make it our first care, our dearest task, to
contribute to your happiness.”

Perdita shook her head; “If it could be so,” she replied, “I were much
in the wrong to disdain your offers. But it is not a matter of choice;
I can live here only. I am a part of this scene; each and all its
properties are a part of me. This is no sudden fancy; I live by it. The
knowledge that I am here, rises with me in the morning, and enables me
to endure the light; it is mingled with my food, which else were
poison; it walks, it sleeps with me, for ever it accompanies me. Here I
may even cease to repine, and may add my tardy consent to the decree
which has taken him from me. He would rather have died such a death,
which will be recorded in history to endless time, than have lived to
old age unknown, unhonoured. Nor can I desire better, than, having been
the chosen and beloved of his heart, here, in youth’s prime, before
added years can tarnish the best feelings of my nature, to watch his
tomb, and speedily rejoin him in his blessed repose.

“So much, my dearest Lionel, I have said, wishing to persuade you that
I do right. If you are unconvinced, I can add nothing further by way of
argument, and I can only declare my fixed resolve. I stay here; force
only can remove me. Be it so; drag me away—I return; confine me,
imprison me, still I escape, and come here. Or would my brother rather
devote the heart-broken Perdita to the straw and chains of a maniac,
than suffer her to rest in peace beneath the shadow of His society, in
this my own selected and beloved recess?”—

All this appeared to me, I own, methodized madness. I imagined, that it
was my imperative duty to take her from scenes that thus forcibly
reminded her of her loss. Nor did I doubt, that in the tranquillity of
our family circle at Windsor, she would recover some degree of
composure, and in the end, of happiness. My affection for Clara also
led me to oppose these fond dreams of cherished grief; her sensibility
had already been too much excited; her infant heedlessness too soon
exchanged for deep and anxious thought. The strange and romantic scheme
of her mother, might confirm and perpetuate the painful view of life,
which had intruded itself thus early on her contemplation.

On returning home, the captain of the steam packet with whom I had
agreed to sail, came to tell me, that accidental circumstances hastened
his departure, and that, if I went with him, I must come on board at
five on the following morning. I hastily gave my consent to this
arrangement, and as hastily formed a plan through which Perdita should
be forced to become my companion. I believe that most people in my
situation would have acted in the same manner. Yet this consideration
does not, or rather did not in after time, diminish the reproaches of
my conscience. At the moment, I felt convinced that I was acting for
the best, and that all I did was right and even necessary.

I sat with Perdita and soothed her, by my seeming assent to her wild
scheme. She received my concurrence with pleasure, and a thousand times
over thanked her deceiving, deceitful brother. As night came on, her
spirits, enlivened by my unexpected concession, regained an almost
forgotten vivacity. I pretended to be alarmed by the feverish glow in
her cheek; I entreated her to take a composing draught; I poured out
the medicine, which she took docilely from me. I watched her as she
drank it. Falsehood and artifice are in themselves so hateful, that,
though I still thought I did right, a feeling of shame and guilt came
painfully upon me. I left her, and soon heard that she slept soundly
under the influence of the opiate I had administered. She was carried
thus unconscious on board; the anchor weighed, and the wind being
favourable, we stood far out to sea; with all the canvas spread, and
the power of the engine to assist, we scudded swiftly and steadily
through the chafed element.

It was late in the day before Perdita awoke, and a longer time elapsed
before recovering from the torpor occasioned by the laudanum, she
perceived her change of situation. She started wildly from her couch,
and flew to the cabin window. The blue and troubled sea sped past the
vessel, and was spread shoreless around: the sky was covered by a rack,
which in its swift motion shewed how speedily she was borne away. The
creaking of the masts, the clang of the wheels, the tramp above, all
persuaded her that she was already far from the shores of
Greece.—“Where are we?” she cried, “where are we going?”—

The attendant whom I had stationed to watch her, replied, “to
England.”—

“And my brother?”—

“Is on deck, Madam.”

“Unkind! unkind!” exclaimed the poor victim, as with a deep sigh she
looked on the waste of waters. Then without further remark, she threw
herself on her couch, and closing her eyes remained motionless; so that
but for the deep sighs that burst from her, it would have seemed that
she slept.

As soon as I heard that she had spoken, I sent Clara to her, that the
sight of the lovely innocent might inspire gentle and affectionate
thoughts. But neither the presence of her child, nor a subsequent visit
from me, could rouse my sister. She looked on Clara with a countenance
of woful meaning, but she did not speak. When I appeared, she turned
away, and in reply to my enquiries, only said, “You know not what you
have done!”—I trusted that this sullenness betokened merely the
struggle between disappointment and natural affection, and that in a
few days she would be reconciled to her fate.

When night came on, she begged that Clara might sleep in a separate
cabin. Her servant, however, remained with her. About midnight she
spoke to the latter, saying that she had had a bad dream, and bade her
go to her daughter, and bring word whether she rested quietly. The
woman obeyed.

The breeze, that had flagged since sunset, now rose again. I was on
deck, enjoying our swift progress. The quiet was disturbed only by the
rush of waters as they divided before the steady keel, the murmur of
the moveless and full sails, the wind whistling in the shrouds, and the
regular motion of the engine. The sea was gently agitated, now shewing
a white crest, and now resuming an uniform hue; the clouds had
disappeared; and dark ether clipt the broad ocean, in which the
constellations vainly sought their accustomed mirror. Our rate could
not have been less than eight knots.

Suddenly I heard a splash in the sea. The sailors on watch rushed to
the side of the vessel, with the cry—some one gone overboard. “It is
not from deck,” said the man at the helm, “something has been thrown
from the aft cabin.” A call for the boat to be lowered was echoed from
the deck. I rushed into my sister’s cabin; it was empty.

With sails abaft, the engine stopt, the vessel remained unwillingly
stationary, until, after an hour’s search, my poor Perdita was brought
on board. But no care could re-animate her, no medicine cause her dear
eyes to open, and the blood to flow again from her pulseless heart. One
clenched hand contained a slip of paper, on which was written, “To
Athens.” To ensure her removal thither, and prevent the irrecoverable
loss of her body in the wide sea, she had had the precaution to fasten
a long shawl round her waist, and again to the staunchions of the cabin
window. She had drifted somewhat under the keel of the vessel, and her
being out of sight occasioned the delay in finding her. And thus the
ill-starred girl died a victim to my senseless rashness. Thus, in early
day, she left us for the company of the dead, and preferred to share
the rocky grave of Raymond, before the animated scene this cheerful
earth afforded, and the society of loving friends. Thus in her
twenty-ninth year she died; having enjoyed some few years of the
happiness of paradise, and sustaining a reverse to which her impatient
spirit and affectionate disposition were unable to submit. As I marked
the placid expression that had settled on her countenance in death, I
felt, in spite of the pangs of remorse, in spite of heart-rending
regret, that it was better to die so, than to drag on long, miserable
years of repining and inconsolable grief. Stress of weather drove us up
the Adriatic Gulph; and, our vessel being hardly fitted to weather a
storm, we took refuge in the port of Ancona. Here I met Georgio Palli,
the vice-admiral of the Greek fleet, a former friend and warm partizan
of Raymond. I committed the remains of my lost Perdita to his care, for
the purpose of having them transported to Hymettus, and placed in the
cell her Raymond already occupied beneath the pyramid. This was all
accomplished even as I wished. She reposed beside her beloved, and the
tomb above was inscribed with the united names of Raymond and Perdita.

I then came to a resolution of pursuing our journey to England
overland. My own heart was racked by regrets and remorse. The
apprehension, that Raymond had departed for ever, that his name,
blended eternally with the past, must be erased from every anticipation
of the future, had come slowly upon me. I had always admired his
talents; his noble aspirations; his grand conceptions of the glory and
majesty of his ambition: his utter want of mean passions; his fortitude
and daring. In Greece I had learnt to love him; his very waywardness,
and self-abandonment to the impulses of superstition, attached me to
him doubly; it might be weakness, but it was the antipodes of all that
was grovelling and selfish. To these pangs were added the loss of
Perdita, lost through my own accursed self-will and conceit. This dear
one, my sole relation; whose progress I had marked from tender
childhood through the varied path of life, and seen her throughout
conspicuous for integrity, devotion, and true affection; for all that
constitutes the peculiar graces of the female character, and beheld her
at last the victim of too much loving, too constant an attachment to
the perishable and lost, she, in her pride of beauty and life, had
thrown aside the pleasant perception of the apparent world for the
unreality of the grave, and had left poor Clara quite an orphan. I
concealed from this beloved child that her mother’s death was
voluntary, and tried every means to awaken cheerfulness in her
sorrow-stricken spirit.

One of my first acts for the recovery even of my own composure, was to
bid farewell to the sea. Its hateful splash renewed again and again to
my sense the death of my sister; its roar was a dirge; in every dark
hull that was tossed on its inconstant bosom, I imaged a bier, that
would convey to death all who trusted to its treacherous smiles.
Farewell to the sea! Come, my Clara, sit beside me in this aerial bark;
quickly and gently it cleaves the azure serene, and with soft
undulation glides upon the current of the air; or, if storm shake its
fragile mechanism, the green earth is below; we can descend, and take
shelter on the stable continent. Here aloft, the companions of the
swift-winged birds, we skim through the unresisting element, fleetly
and fearlessly. The light boat heaves not, nor is opposed by
death-bearing waves; the ether opens before the prow, and the shadow of
the globe that upholds it, shelters us from the noon-day sun. Beneath
are the plains of Italy, or the vast undulations of the wave-like
Apennines: fertility reposes in their many folds, and woods crown the
summits. The free and happy peasant, unshackled by the Austrian, bears
the double harvest to the garner; and the refined citizens rear without
dread the long blighted tree of knowledge in this garden of the world.
We were lifted above the Alpine peaks, and from their deep and brawling
ravines entered the plain of fair France, and after an airy journey of
six days, we landed at Dieppe, furled the feathered wings, and closed
the silken globe of our little pinnace. A heavy rain made this mode of
travelling now incommodious; so we embarked in a steam-packet, and
after a short passage landed at Portsmouth.

A strange story was rife here. A few days before, a tempest-struck
vessel had appeared off the town: the hull was parched-looking and
cracked, the sails rent, and bent in a careless, unseamanlike manner,
the shrouds tangled and broken. She drifted towards the harbour, and
was stranded on the sands at the entrance. In the morning the
custom-house officers, together with a crowd of idlers, visited her.
One only of the crew appeared to have arrived with her. He had got to
shore, and had walked a few paces towards the town, and then,
vanquished by malady and approaching death, had fallen on the
inhospitable beach. He was found stiff, his hands clenched, and pressed
against his breast. His skin, nearly black, his matted hair and bristly
beard, were signs of a long protracted misery. It was whispered that he
had died of the plague. No one ventured on board the vessel, and
strange sights were averred to be seen at night, walking the deck, and
hanging on the masts and shrouds. She soon went to pieces; I was shewn
where she had been, and saw her disjoined timbers tossed on the waves.
The body of the man who had landed, had been buried deep in the sands;
and none could tell more, than that the vessel was American built, and
that several months before the Fortunatas had sailed from Philadelphia,
of which no tidings were afterwards received.




CHAPTER IV.


I returned to my family estate in the autumn of the year 2092. My heart
had long been with them; and I felt sick with the hope and delight of
seeing them again. The district which contained them appeared the abode
of every kindly spirit. Happiness, love and peace, walked the forest
paths, and tempered the atmosphere. After all the agitation and sorrow
I had endured in Greece, I sought Windsor, as the storm-driven bird
does the nest in which it may fold its wings in tranquillity.

How unwise had the wanderers been, who had deserted its shelter,
entangled themselves in the web of society, and entered on what men of
the world call “life,”—that labyrinth of evil, that scheme of mutual
torture. To live, according to this sense of the word, we must not only
observe and learn, we must also feel; we must not be mere spectators of
action, we must act; we must not describe, but be subjects of
description. Deep sorrow must have been the inmate of our bosoms; fraud
must have lain in wait for us; the artful must have deceived us;
sickening doubt and false hope must have chequered our days; hilarity
and joy, that lap the soul in ecstasy, must at times have possessed us.
Who that knows what “life” is, would pine for this feverish species of
existence? I have lived. I have spent days and nights of festivity; I
have joined in ambitious hopes, and exulted in victory: now,—shut the
door on the world, and build high the wall that is to separate me from
the troubled scene enacted within its precincts. Let us live for each
other and for happiness; let us seek peace in our dear home, near the
inland murmur of streams, and the gracious waving of trees, the
beauteous vesture of earth, and sublime pageantry of the skies. Let us
leave “life,” that we may live.

Idris was well content with this resolve of mine. Her native
sprightliness needed no undue excitement, and her placid heart reposed
contented on my love, the well-being of her children, and the beauty of
surrounding nature. Her pride and blameless ambition was to create
smiles in all around her, and to shed repose on the fragile existence
of her brother. In spite of her tender nursing, the health of Adrian
perceptibly declined. Walking, riding, the common occupations of life,
overcame him: he felt no pain, but seemed to tremble for ever on the
verge of annihilation. Yet, as he had lived on for months nearly in the
same state, he did not inspire us with any immediate fear; and, though
he talked of death as an event most familiar to his thoughts, he did
not cease to exert himself to render others happy, or to cultivate his
own astonishing powers of mind. Winter passed away; and spring, led by
the months, awakened life in all nature. The forest was dressed in
green; the young calves frisked on the new-sprung grass; the
wind-winged shadows of light clouds sped over the green cornfields; the
hermit cuckoo repeated his monotonous all-hail to the season; the
nightingale, bird of love and minion of the evening star, filled the
woods with song; while Venus lingered in the warm sunset, and the young
green of the trees lay in gentle relief along the clear horizon.

Delight awoke in every heart, delight and exultation; for there was
peace through all the world; the temple of Universal Janus was shut,
and man died not that year by the hand of man.

“Let this last but twelve months,” said Adrian; “and earth will become
a Paradise. The energies of man were before directed to the destruction
of his species: they now aim at its liberation and preservation. Man
cannot repose, and his restless aspirations will now bring forth good
instead of evil. The favoured countries of the south will throw off the
iron yoke of servitude; poverty will quit us, and with that, sickness.
What may not the forces, never before united, of liberty and peace
achieve in this dwelling of man?”

“Dreaming, for ever dreaming, Windsor!” said Ryland, the old adversary
of Raymond, and candidate for the Protectorate at the ensuing election.
“Be assured that earth is not, nor ever can be heaven, while the seeds
of hell are natives of her soil. When the seasons have become equal,
when the air breeds no disorders, when its surface is no longer liable
to blights and droughts, then sickness will cease; when men’s passions
are dead, poverty will depart. When love is no longer akin to hate,
then brotherhood will exist: we are very far from that state at
present.”

“Not so far as you may suppose,” observed a little old astronomer, by
name Merrival, “the poles precede slowly, but securely; in an hundred
thousand years—”

“We shall all be underground,” said Ryland.

“The pole of the earth will coincide with the pole of the ecliptic,”
continued the astronomer, “an universal spring will be produced, and
earth become a paradise.”

“And we shall of course enjoy the benefit of the change,” said Ryland,
contemptuously.

“We have strange news here,” I observed. I had the newspaper in my
hand, and, as usual, had turned to the intelligence from Greece. “It
seems that the total destruction of Constantinople, and the supposition
that winter had purified the air of the fallen city, gave the Greeks
courage to visit its site, and begin to rebuild it. But they tell us
that the curse of God is on the place, for every one who has ventured
within the walls has been tainted by the plague; that this disease has
spread in Thrace and Macedonia; and now, fearing the virulence of
infection during the coming heats, a cordon has been drawn on the
frontiers of Thessaly, and a strict quarantine exacted.” This
intelligence brought us back from the prospect of paradise, held out
after the lapse of an hundred thousand years, to the pain and misery at
present existent upon earth. We talked of the ravages made last year by
pestilence in every quarter of the world; and of the dreadful
consequences of a second visitation. We discussed the best means of
preventing infection, and of preserving health and activity in a large
city thus afflicted—London, for instance. Merrival did not join in this
conversation; drawing near Idris, he proceeded to assure her that the
joyful prospect of an earthly paradise after an hundred thousand years,
was clouded to him by the knowledge that in a certain period of time
after, an earthly hell or purgatory, would occur, when the ecliptic and
equator would be at right angles.[4] Our party at length broke up; “We
are all dreaming this morning,” said Ryland, “it is as wise to discuss
the probability of a visitation of the plague in our well-governed
metropolis, as to calculate the centuries which must escape before we
can grow pine-apples here in the open air.”

But, though it seemed absurd to calculate upon the arrival of the
plague in London, I could not reflect without extreme pain on the
desolation this evil would cause in Greece. The English for the most
part talked of Thrace and Macedonia, as they would of a lunar
territory, which, unknown to them, presented no distinct idea or
interest to the minds. I had trod the soil. The faces of many of the
inhabitants were familiar to me; in the towns, plains, hills, and
defiles of these countries, I had enjoyed unspeakable delight, as I
journied through them the year before. Some romantic village, some
cottage, or elegant abode there situated, inhabited by the lovely and
the good, rose before my mental sight, and the question haunted me, is
the plague there also?—That same invincible monster, which hovered over
and devoured Constantinople—that fiend more cruel than tempest, less
tame than fire, is, alas, unchained in that beautiful country—these
reflections would not allow me to rest.

The political state of England became agitated as the time drew near
when the new Protector was to be elected. This event excited the more
interest, since it was the current report, that if the popular
candidate (Ryland) should be chosen, the question of the abolition of
hereditary rank, and other feudal relics, would come under the
consideration of parliament. Not a word had been spoken during the
present session on any of these topics. Every thing would depend upon
the choice of a Protector, and the elections of the ensuing year. Yet
this very silence was awful, shewing the deep weight attributed to the
question; the fear of either party to hazard an ill-timed attack, and
the expectation of a furious contention when it should begin.

But although St. Stephen’s did not echo with the voice which filled
each heart, the newspapers teemed with nothing else; and in private
companies the conversation however remotely begun, soon verged towards
this central point, while voices were lowered and chairs drawn closer.
The nobles did not hesitate to express their fear; the other party
endeavoured to treat the matter lightly. “Shame on the country,” said
Ryland, “to lay so much stress upon words and frippery; it is a
question of nothing; of the new painting of carriage-pannels and the
embroidery of footmen’s coats.”

Yet could England indeed doff her lordly trappings, and be content with
the democratic style of America? Were the pride of ancestry, the
patrician spirit, the gentle courtesies and refined pursuits, splendid
attributes of rank, to be erased among us? We were told that this would
not be the case; that we were by nature a poetical people, a nation
easily duped by words, ready to array clouds in splendour, and bestow
honour on the dust. This spirit we could never lose; and it was to
diffuse this concentrated spirit of birth, that the new law was to be
brought forward. We were assured that, when the name and title of
Englishman was the sole patent of nobility, we should all be noble;
that when no man born under English sway, felt another his superior in
rank, courtesy and refinement would become the birth-right of all our
countrymen. Let not England be so far disgraced, as to have it imagined
that it can be without nobles, nature’s true nobility, who bear their
patent in their mien, who are from their cradle elevated above the rest
of their species, because they are better than the rest. Among a race
of independent, and generous, and well educated men, in a country where
the imagination is empress of men’s minds, there needs be no fear that
we should want a perpetual succession of the high-born and lordly. That
party, however, could hardly yet be considered a minority in the
kingdom, who extolled the ornament of the column, “the Corinthian
capital of polished society;” they appealed to prejudices without
number, to old attachments and young hopes; to the expectation of
thousands who might one day become peers; they set up as a scarecrow,
the spectre of all that was sordid, mechanic and base in the commercial
republics.

The plague had come to Athens. Hundreds of English residents returned
to their own country. Raymond’s beloved Athenians, the free, the noble
people of the divinest town in Greece, fell like ripe corn before the
merciless sickle of the adversary. Its pleasant places were deserted;
its temples and palaces were converted into tombs; its energies, bent
before towards the highest objects of human ambition, were now forced
to converge to one point, the guarding against the innumerous arrows of
the plague.

At any other time this disaster would have excited extreme compassion
among us; but it was now passed over, while each mind was engaged by
the coming controversy. It was not so with me; and the question of rank
and right dwindled to insignificance in my eyes, when I pictured the
scene of suffering Athens. I heard of the death of only sons; of wives
and husbands most devoted; of the rending of ties twisted with the
heart’s fibres, of friend losing friend, and young mothers mourning for
their first born; and these moving incidents were grouped and painted
in my mind by the knowledge of the persons, by my esteem and affection
for the sufferers. It was the admirers, friends, fellow soldiers of
Raymond, families that had welcomed Perdita to Greece, and lamented
with her the loss of her lord, that were swept away, and went to dwell
with them in the undistinguishing tomb.

The plague at Athens had been preceded and caused by the contagion from
the East; and the scene of havoc and death continued to be acted there,
on a scale of fearful magnitude. A hope that the visitation of the
present year would prove the last, kept up the spirits of the merchants
connected with these countries; but the inhabitants were driven to
despair, or to a resignation which, arising from fanaticism, assumed
the same dark hue. America had also received the taint; and, were it
yellow fever or plague, the epidemic was gifted with a virulence before
unfelt. The devastation was not confined to the towns, but spread
throughout the country; the hunter died in the woods, the peasant in
the corn-fields, and the fisher on his native waters.

A strange story was brought to us from the East, to which little credit
would have been given, had not the fact been attested by a multitude of
witnesses, in various parts of the world. On the twenty-first of June,
it was said that an hour before noon, a black sun arose: an orb, the
size of that luminary, but dark, defined, whose beams were shadows,
ascended from the west; in about an hour it had reached the meridian,
and eclipsed the bright parent of day. Night fell upon every country,
night, sudden, rayless, entire. The stars came out, shedding their
ineffectual glimmerings on the light-widowed earth. But soon the dim
orb passed from over the sun, and lingered down the eastern heaven. As
it descended, its dusky rays crossed the brilliant ones of the sun, and
deadened or distorted them. The shadows of things assumed strange and
ghastly shapes. The wild animals in the woods took fright at the
unknown shapes figured on the ground. They fled they knew not whither;
and the citizens were filled with greater dread, at the convulsion
which “shook lions into civil streets;”—birds, strong-winged eagles,
suddenly blinded, fell in the market-places, while owls and bats shewed
themselves welcoming the early night. Gradually the object of fear sank
beneath the horizon, and to the last shot up shadowy beams into the
otherwise radiant air. Such was the tale sent us from Asia, from the
eastern extremity of Europe, and from Africa as far west as the Golden
Coast. Whether this story were true or not, the effects were certain.
Through Asia, from the banks of the Nile to the shores of the Caspian,
from the Hellespont even to the sea of Oman, a sudden panic was driven.
The men filled the mosques; the women, veiled, hastened to the tombs,
and carried offerings to the dead, thus to preserve the living. The
plague was forgotten, in this new fear which the black sun had spread;
and, though the dead multiplied, and the streets of Ispahan, of Pekin,
and of Delhi were strewed with pestilence-struck corpses, men passed
on, gazing on the ominous sky, regardless of the death beneath their
feet. The christians sought their churches,—christian maidens, even at
the feast of roses, clad in white, with shining veils, sought, in long
procession, the places consecrated to their religion, filling the air
with their hymns; while, ever and anon, from the lips of some poor
mourner in the crowd, a voice of wailing burst, and the rest looked up,
fancying they could discern the sweeping wings of angels, who passed
over the earth, lamenting the disasters about to fall on man.

In the sunny clime of Persia, in the crowded cities of China, amidst
the aromatic groves of Cashmere, and along the southern shores of the
Mediterranean, such scenes had place. Even in Greece the tale of the
sun of darkness encreased the fears and despair of the dying multitude.
We, in our cloudy isle, were far removed from danger, and the only
circumstance that brought these disasters at all home to us, was the
daily arrival of vessels from the east, crowded with emigrants, mostly
English; for the Moslems, though the fear of death was spread keenly
among them, still clung together; that, if they were to die (and if
they were, death would as readily meet them on the homeless sea, or in
far England, as in Persia,)— if they were to die, their bones might
rest in earth made sacred by the relics of true believers. Mecca had
never before been so crowded with pilgrims; yet the Arabs neglected to
pillage the caravans, but, humble and weaponless, they joined the
procession, praying Mahomet to avert plague from their tents and
deserts.

I cannot describe the rapturous delight with which I turned from
political brawls at home, and the physical evils of distant countries,
to my own dear home, to the selected abode of goodness and love; to
peace, and the interchange of every sacred sympathy. Had I never
quitted Windsor, these emotions would not have been so intense; but I
had in Greece been the prey of fear and deplorable change; in Greece,
after a period of anxiety and sorrow, I had seen depart two, whose very
names were the symbol of greatness and virtue. But such miseries could
never intrude upon the domestic circle left to me, while, secluded in
our beloved forest, we passed our lives in tranquillity. Some small
change indeed the progress of years brought here; and time, as it is
wont, stamped the traces of mortality on our pleasures and
expectations. Idris, the most affectionate wife, sister and friend, was
a tender and loving mother. The feeling was not with her as with many,
a pastime; it was a passion. We had had three children; one, the second
in age, died while I was in Greece. This had dashed the triumphant and
rapturous emotions of maternity with grief and fear. Before this event,
the little beings, sprung from herself, the young heirs of her
transient life, seemed to have a sure lease of existence; now she
dreaded that the pitiless destroyer might snatch her remaining
darlings, as it had snatched their brother. The least illness caused
throes of terror; she was miserable if she were at all absent from
them; her treasure of happiness she had garnered in their fragile
being, and kept forever on the watch, lest the insidious thief should
as before steal these valued gems. She had fortunately small cause for
fear. Alfred, now nine years old, was an upright, manly little fellow,
with radiant brow, soft eyes, and gentle, though independent
disposition. Our youngest was yet in infancy; but his downy cheek was
sprinkled with the roses of health, and his unwearied vivacity filled
our halls with innocent laughter.

Clara had passed the age which, from its mute ignorance, was the source
of the fears of Idris. Clara was dear to her, to all. There was so much
intelligence combined with innocence, sensibility with forbearance, and
seriousness with perfect good-humour, a beauty so transcendant, united
to such endearing simplicity, that she hung like a pearl in the shrine
of our possessions, a treasure of wonder and excellence.

At the beginning of winter our Alfred, now nine years of age, first
went to school at Eton. This appeared to him the primary step towards
manhood, and he was proportionably pleased. Community of study and
amusement developed the best parts of his character, his steady
perseverance, generosity, and well-governed firmness. What deep and
sacred emotions are excited in a father’s bosom, when he first becomes
convinced that his love for his child is not a mere instinct, but
worthily bestowed, and that others, less akin, participate his
approbation! It was supreme happiness to Idris and myself, to find that
the frankness which Alfred’s open brow indicated, the intelligence of
his eyes, the tempered sensibility of his tones, were not delusions,
but indications of talents and virtues, which would “grow with his
growth, and strengthen with his strength.” At this period, the
termination of an animal’s love for its offspring,—the true affection
of the human parent commences. We no longer look on this dearest part
of ourselves, as a tender plant which we must cherish, or a plaything
for an idle hour. We build now on his intellectual faculties, we
establish our hopes on his moral propensities. His weakness still
imparts anxiety to this feeling, his ignorance prevents entire
intimacy; but we begin to respect the future man, and to endeavour to
secure his esteem, even as if he were our equal. What can a parent have
more at heart than the good opinion of his child? In all our
transactions with him our honour must be inviolate, the integrity of
our relations untainted: fate and circumstance may, when he arrives at
maturity, separate us for ever—but, as his aegis in danger, his
consolation in hardship, let the ardent youth for ever bear with him
through the rough path of life, love and honour for his parents.

We had lived so long in the vicinity of Eton, that its population of
young folks was well known to us. Many of them had been Alfred’s
playmates, before they became his school-fellows. We now watched this
youthful congregation with redoubled interest. We marked the difference
of character among the boys, and endeavoured to read the future man in
the stripling. There is nothing more lovely, to which the heart more
yearns than a free-spirited boy, gentle, brave, and generous. Several
of the Etonians had these characteristics; all were distinguished by a
sense of honour, and spirit of enterprize; in some, as they verged
towards manhood, this degenerated into presumption; but the younger
ones, lads a little older than our own, were conspicuous for their
gallant and sweet dispositions.

Here were the future governors of England; the men, who, when our
ardour was cold, and our projects completed or destroyed for ever,
when, our drama acted, we doffed the garb of the hour, and assumed the
uniform of age, or of more equalizing death; here were the beings who
were to carry on the vast machine of society; here were the lovers,
husbands, fathers; here the landlord, the politician, the soldier; some
fancied that they were even now ready to appear on the stage, eager to
make one among the dramatis personae of active life. It was not long
since I was like one of these beardless aspirants; when my boy shall
have obtained the place I now hold, I shall have tottered into a
grey-headed, wrinkled old man. Strange system! riddle of the Sphynx,
most awe-striking! that thus man remains, while we the individuals pass
away. Such is, to borrow the words of an eloquent and philosophic
writer, “the mode of existence decreed to a permanent body composed of
transitory parts; wherein, by the disposition of a stupendous wisdom,
moulding together the great mysterious incorporation of the human race,
the whole, at one time, is never old, or middle-aged, or young, but, in
a condition of unchangeable constancy, moves on through the varied
tenour of perpetual decay, fall, renovation, and progression.”[5]

Willingly do I give place to thee, dear Alfred! advance, offspring of
tender love, child of our hopes; advance a soldier on the road to which
I have been the pioneer! I will make way for thee. I have already put
off the carelessness of childhood, the unlined brow, and springy gait
of early years, that they may adorn thee. Advance; and I will despoil
myself still further for thy advantage. Time shall rob me of the graces
of maturity, shall take the fire from my eyes, and agility from my
limbs, shall steal the better part of life, eager expectation and
passionate love, and shower them in double portion on thy dear head.
Advance! avail thyself of the gift, thou and thy comrades; and in the
drama you are about to act, do not disgrace those who taught you to
enter on the stage, and to pronounce becomingly the parts assigned to
you! May your progress be uninterrupted and secure; born during the
spring-tide of the hopes of man, may you lead up the summer to which no
winter may succeed!

 [4] See an ingenious Essay, entitled, “The Mythological Astronomy of
 the Ancients Demonstrated,” by Mackey, a shoemaker, of Norwich printed
 in 1822.


 [5] Burke’s Reflections on the French Revolution.




CHAPTER V.


Some disorder had surely crept into the course of the elements,
destroying their benignant influence. The wind, prince of air, raged
through his kingdom, lashing the sea into fury, and subduing the rebel
earth into some sort of obedience.

The God sends down his angry plagues from high,
Famine and pestilence in heaps they die.
Again in vengeance of his wrath he falls
On their great hosts, and breaks their tottering walls;
Arrests their navies on the ocean’s plain,
And whelms their strength with mountains of the main.[6]


Their deadly power shook the flourishing countries of the south, and
during winter, even, we, in our northern retreat, began to quake under
their ill effects.

That fable is unjust, which gives the superiority to the sun over the
wind. Who has not seen the lightsome earth, the balmy atmosphere, and
basking nature become dark, cold and ungenial, when the sleeping wind
has awoke in the east? Or, when the dun clouds thickly veil the sky,
while exhaustless stores of rain are poured down, until, the dank earth
refusing to imbibe the superabundant moisture, it lies in pools on the
surface; when the torch of day seems like a meteor, to be quenched; who
has not seen the cloud-stirring north arise, the streaked blue appear,
and soon an opening made in the vapours in the eye of the wind, through
which the bright azure shines? The clouds become thin; an arch is
formed for ever rising upwards, till, the universal cope being
unveiled, the sun pours forth its rays, re-animated and fed by the
breeze.

Then mighty art thou, O wind, to be throned above all other vicegerents
of nature’s power; whether thou comest destroying from the east, or
pregnant with elementary life from the west; thee the clouds obey; the
sun is subservient to thee; the shoreless ocean is thy slave! Thou
sweepest over the earth, and oaks, the growth of centuries, submit to
thy viewless axe; the snow-drift is scattered on the pinnacles of the
Alps, the avalanche thunders down their vallies. Thou holdest the keys
of the frost, and canst first chain and then set free the streams;
under thy gentle governance the buds and leaves are born, they flourish
nursed by thee.

Why dost thou howl thus, O wind? By day and by night for four long
months thy roarings have not ceased—the shores of the sea are strewn
with wrecks, its keel-welcoming surface has become impassable, the
earth has shed her beauty in obedience to thy command; the frail
balloon dares no longer sail on the agitated air; thy ministers, the
clouds, deluge the land with rain; rivers forsake their banks; the wild
torrent tears up the mountain path; plain and wood, and verdant dell
are despoiled of their loveliness; our very cities are wasted by thee.
Alas, what will become of us? It seems as if the giant waves of ocean,
and vast arms of the sea, were about to wrench the deep-rooted island
from its centre; and cast it, a ruin and a wreck, upon the fields of
the Atlantic.

What are we, the inhabitants of this globe, least among the many that
people infinite space? Our minds embrace infinity; the visible
mechanism of our being is subject to merest accident. Day by day we are
forced to believe this. He whom a scratch has disorganized, he who
disappears from apparent life under the influence of the hostile agency
at work around us, had the same powers as I—I also am subject to the
same laws. In the face of all this we call ourselves lords of the
creation, wielders of the elements, masters of life and death, and we
allege in excuse of this arrogance, that though the individual is
destroyed, man continues for ever.

Thus, losing our identity, that of which we are chiefly conscious, we
glory in the continuity of our species, and learn to regard death
without terror. But when any whole nation becomes the victim of the
destructive powers of exterior agents, then indeed man shrinks into
insignificance, he feels his tenure of life insecure, his inheritance
on earth cut off.

I remember, after having witnessed the destructive effects of a fire, I
could not even behold a small one in a stove, without a sensation of
fear. The mounting flames had curled round the building, as it fell,
and was destroyed. They insinuated themselves into the substances about
them, and the impediments to their progress yielded at their touch.
Could we take integral parts of this power, and not be subject to its
operation? Could we domesticate a cub of this wild beast, and not fear
its growth and maturity?

Thus we began to feel, with regard to many-visaged death let loose on
the chosen districts of our fair habitation, and above all, with regard
to the plague. We feared the coming summer. Nations, bordering on the
already infected countries, began to enter upon serious plans for the
better keeping out of the enemy. We, a commercial people, were obliged
to bring such schemes under consideration; and the question of
contagion became matter of earnest disquisition.

That the plague was not what is commonly called contagious, like the
scarlet fever, or extinct small-pox, was proved. It was called an
epidemic. But the grand question was still unsettled of how this
epidemic was generated and increased. If infection depended upon the
air, the air was subject to infection. As for instance, a typhus fever
has been brought by ships to one sea-port town; yet the very people who
brought it there, were incapable of communicating it in a town more
fortunately situated. But how are we to judge of airs, and pronounce—in
such a city plague will die unproductive; in such another, nature has
provided for it a plentiful harvest? In the same way, individuals may
escape ninety-nine times, and receive the death-blow at the hundredth;
because bodies are sometimes in a state to reject the infection of
malady, and at others, thirsty to imbibe it. These reflections made our
legislators pause, before they could decide on the laws to be put in
force. The evil was so wide-spreading, so violent and immedicable, that
no care, no prevention could be judged superfluous, which even added a
chance to our escape.

These were questions of prudence; there was no immediate necessity for
an earnest caution. England was still secure. France, Germany, Italy
and Spain, were interposed, walls yet without a breach, between us and
the plague. Our vessels truly were the sport of winds and waves, even
as Gulliver was the toy of the Brobdignagians; but we on our stable
abode could not be hurt in life or limb by these eruptions of nature.
We could not fear—we did not. Yet a feeling of awe, a breathless
sentiment of wonder, a painful sense of the degradation of humanity,
was introduced into every heart. Nature, our mother, and our friend,
had turned on us a brow of menace. She shewed us plainly, that, though
she permitted us to assign her laws and subdue her apparent powers,
yet, if she put forth but a finger, we must quake. She could take our
globe, fringed with mountains, girded by the atmosphere, containing the
condition of our being, and all that man’s mind could invent or his
force achieve; she could take the ball in her hand, and cast it into
space, where life would be drunk up, and man and all his efforts for
ever annihilated.

These speculations were rife among us; yet not the less we proceeded in
our daily occupations, and our plans, whose accomplishment demanded the
lapse of many years. No voice was heard telling us to hold! When
foreign distresses came to be felt by us through the channels of
commerce, we set ourselves to apply remedies. Subscriptions were made
for the emigrants, and merchants bankrupt by the failure of trade. The
English spirit awoke to its full activity, and, as it had ever done,
set itself to resist the evil, and to stand in the breach which
diseased nature had suffered chaos and death to make in the bounds and
banks which had hitherto kept them out.

At the commencement of summer, we began to feel, that the mischief
which had taken place in distant countries was greater than we had at
first suspected. Quito was destroyed by an earthquake. Mexico laid
waste by the united effects of storm, pestilence and famine. Crowds of
emigrants inundated the west of Europe; and our island had become the
refuge of thousands. In the mean time Ryland had been chosen Protector.
He had sought this office with eagerness, under the idea of turning his
whole forces to the suppression of the privileged orders of our
community. His measures were thwarted, and his schemes interrupted by
this new state of things. Many of the foreigners were utterly
destitute; and their increasing numbers at length forbade a recourse to
the usual modes of relief. Trade was stopped by the failure of the
interchange of cargoes usual between us, and America, India, Egypt and
Greece. A sudden break was made in the routine of our lives. In vain
our Protector and his partizans sought to conceal this truth; in vain,
day after day, he appointed a period for the discussion of the new laws
concerning hereditary rank and privilege; in vain he endeavoured to
represent the evil as partial and temporary. These disasters came home
to so many bosoms, and, through the various channels of commerce, were
carried so entirely into every class and division of the community,
that of necessity they became the first question in the state, the
chief subjects to which we must turn our attention.

Can it be true, each asked the other with wonder and dismay, that whole
countries are laid waste, whole nations annihilated, by these disorders
in nature? The vast cities of America, the fertile plains of Hindostan,
the crowded abodes of the Chinese, are menaced with utter ruin. Where
late the busy multitudes assembled for pleasure or profit, now only the
sound of wailing and misery is heard. The air is empoisoned, and each
human being inhales death, even while in youth and health, their hopes
are in the flower. We called to mind the plague of 1348, when it was
calculated that a third of mankind had been destroyed. As yet western
Europe was uninfected; would it always be so?

O, yes, it would—Countrymen, fear not! In the still uncultivated wilds
of America, what wonder that among its other giant destroyers, plague
should be numbered! It is of old a native of the East, sister of the
tornado, the earthquake, and the simoon. Child of the sun, and nursling
of the tropics, it would expire in these climes. It drinks the dark
blood of the inhabitant of the south, but it never feasts on the
pale-faced Celt. If perchance some stricken Asiatic come among us,
plague dies with him, uncommunicated and innoxious. Let us weep for our
brethren, though we can never experience their reverse. Let us lament
over and assist the children of the garden of the earth. Late we envied
their abodes, their spicy groves, fertile plains, and abundant
loveliness. But in this mortal life extremes are always matched; the
thorn grows with the rose, the poison tree and the cinnamon mingle
their boughs. Persia, with its cloth of gold, marble halls, and
infinite wealth, is now a tomb. The tent of the Arab is fallen in the
sands, and his horse spurns the ground unbridled and unsaddled. The
voice of lamentation fills the valley of Cashmere; its dells and woods,
its cool fountains, and gardens of roses, are polluted by the dead; in
Circassia and Georgia the spirit of beauty weeps over the ruin of its
favourite temple—the form of woman.

Our own distresses, though they were occasioned by the fictitious
reciprocity of commerce, encreased in due proportion. Bankers,
merchants, and manufacturers, whose trade depended on exports and
interchange of wealth, became bankrupt. Such things, when they happen
singly, affect only the immediate parties; but the prosperity of the
nation was now shaken by frequent and extensive losses. Families, bred
in opulence and luxury, were reduced to beggary. The very state of
peace in which we gloried was injurious; there were no means of
employing the idle, or of sending any overplus of population out of the
country. Even the source of colonies was dried up, for in New Holland,
Van Diemen’s Land, and the Cape of Good Hope, plague raged. O, for some
medicinal vial to purge unwholesome nature, and bring back the earth to
its accustomed health!

Ryland was a man of strong intellects and quick and sound decision in
the usual course of things, but he stood aghast at the multitude of
evils that gathered round us. Must he tax the landed interest to assist
our commercial population? To do this, he must gain the favour of the
chief land-holders, the nobility of the country; and these were his
vowed enemies—he must conciliate them by abandoning his favourite
scheme of equalization; he must confirm them in their manorial rights;
he must sell his cherished plans for the permanent good of his country,
for temporary relief. He must aim no more at the dear object of his
ambition; throwing his arms aside, he must for present ends give up the
ultimate object of his endeavours. He came to Windsor to consult with
us. Every day added to his difficulties; the arrival of fresh vessels
with emigrants, the total cessation of commerce, the starving multitude
that thronged around the palace of the Protectorate, were circumstances
not to be tampered with. The blow was struck; the aristocracy obtained
all they wished, and they subscribed to a twelvemonths’ bill, which
levied twenty per cent on all the rent-rolls of the country. Calm was
now restored to the metropolis, and to the populous cities, before
driven to desperation; and we returned to the consideration of distant
calamities, wondering if the future would bring any alleviation to
their excess. It was August; so there could be small hope of relief
during the heats. On the contrary, the disease gained virulence, while
starvation did its accustomed work. Thousands died unlamented; for
beside the yet warm corpse the mourner was stretched, made mute by
death.

On the eighteenth of this month news arrived in London that the plague
was in France and Italy. These tidings were at first whispered about
town; but no one dared express aloud the soul-quailing intelligence.
When any one met a friend in the street, he only cried as he hurried
on, “You know!”— while the other, with an ejaculation of fear and
horror, would answer,— “What will become of us?” At length it was
mentioned in the newspapers. The paragraph was inserted in an obscure
part: “We regret to state that there can be no longer a doubt of the
plague having been introduced at Leghorn, Genoa, and Marseilles.” No
word of comment followed; each reader made his own fearful one. We were
as a man who hears that his house is burning, and yet hurries through
the streets, borne along by a lurking hope of a mistake, till he turns
the corner, and sees his sheltering roof enveloped in a flame. Before
it had been a rumour; but now in words uneraseable, in definite and
undeniable print, the knowledge went forth. Its obscurity of situation
rendered it the more conspicuous: the diminutive letters grew gigantic
to the bewildered eye of fear: they seemed graven with a pen of iron,
impressed by fire, woven in the clouds, stamped on the very front of
the universe.

The English, whether travellers or residents, came pouring in one great
revulsive stream, back on their own country; and with them crowds of
Italians and Spaniards. Our little island was filled even to bursting.
At first an unusual quantity of specie made its appearance with the
emigrants; but these people had no means of receiving back into their
hands what they spent among us. With the advance of summer, and the
increase of the distemper, rents were unpaid, and their remittances
failed them. It was impossible to see these crowds of wretched,
perishing creatures, late nurslings of luxury, and not stretch out a
hand to save them. As at the conclusion of the eighteenth century, the
English unlocked their hospitable store, for the relief of those driven
from their homes by political revolution; so now they were not backward
in affording aid to the victims of a more wide-spreading calamity. We
had many foreign friends whom we eagerly sought out, and relieved from
dreadful penury. Our Castle became an asylum for the unhappy. A little
population occupied its halls. The revenue of its possessor, which had
always found a mode of expenditure congenial to his generous nature,
was now attended to more parsimoniously, that it might embrace a wider
portion of utility. It was not however money, except partially, but the
necessaries of life, that became scarce. It was difficult to find an
immediate remedy. The usual one of imports was entirely cut off. In
this emergency, to feed the very people to whom we had given refuge, we
were obliged to yield to the plough and the mattock our
pleasure-grounds and parks. Live stock diminished sensibly in the
country, from the effects of the great demand in the market. Even the
poor deer, our antlered proteges, were obliged to fall for the sake of
worthier pensioners. The labour necessary to bring the lands to this
sort of culture, employed and fed the offcasts of the diminished
manufactories.

Adrian did not rest only with the exertions he could make with regard
to his own possessions. He addressed himself to the wealthy of the
land; he made proposals in parliament little adapted to please the
rich; but his earnest pleadings and benevolent eloquence were
irresistible. To give up their pleasure-grounds to the agriculturist,
to diminish sensibly the number of horses kept for the purposes of
luxury throughout the country, were means obvious, but unpleasing. Yet,
to the honour of the English be it recorded, that, although natural
disinclination made them delay awhile, yet when the misery of their
fellow-creatures became glaring, an enthusiastic generosity inspired
their decrees. The most luxurious were often the first to part with
their indulgencies. As is common in communities, a fashion was set. The
high-born ladies of the country would have deemed themselves disgraced
if they had now enjoyed, what they before called a necessary, the ease
of a carriage. Chairs, as in olden time, and Indian palanquins were
introduced for the infirm; but else it was nothing singular to see
females of rank going on foot to places of fashionable resort. It was
more common, for all who possessed landed property to secede to their
estates, attended by whole troops of the indigent, to cut down their
woods to erect temporary dwellings, and to portion out their parks,
parterres and flower-gardens, to necessitous families. Many of these,
of high rank in their own countries, now, with hoe in hand, turned up
the soil. It was found necessary at last to check the spirit of
sacrifice, and to remind those whose generosity proceeded to lavish
waste, that, until the present state of things became permanent, of
which there was no likelihood, it was wrong to carry change so far as
to make a reaction difficult. Experience demonstrated that in a year or
two pestilence would cease; it were well that in the mean time we
should not have destroyed our fine breeds of horses, or have utterly
changed the face of the ornamented portion of the country.

It may be imagined that things were in a bad state indeed, before this
spirit of benevolence could have struck such deep roots. The infection
had now spread in the southern provinces of France. But that country
had so many resources in the way of agriculture, that the rush of
population from one part of it to another, and its increase through
foreign emigration, was less felt than with us. The panic struck
appeared of more injury, than disease and its natural concomitants.

Winter was hailed, a general and never-failing physician. The
embrowning woods, and swollen rivers, the evening mists, and morning
frosts, were welcomed with gratitude. The effects of purifying cold
were immediately felt; and the lists of mortality abroad were curtailed
each week. Many of our visitors left us: those whose homes were far in
the south, fled delightedly from our northern winter, and sought their
native land, secure of plenty even after their fearful visitation. We
breathed again. What the coming summer would bring, we knew not; but
the present months were our own, and our hopes of a cessation of
pestilence were high.

 [6]Elton’s translation of Hesiod’s Works.




CHAPTER VI.


I have lingered thus long on the extreme bank, the wasting shoal that
stretched into the stream of life, dallying with the shadow of death.
Thus long, I have cradled my heart in retrospection of past happiness,
when hope was. Why not for ever thus? I am not immortal; and the thread
of my history might be spun out to the limits of my existence. But the
same sentiment that first led me to pourtray scenes replete with tender
recollections, now bids me hurry on. The same yearning of this warm,
panting heart, that has made me in written words record my vagabond
youth, my serene manhood, and the passions of my soul, makes me now
recoil from further delay. I must complete my work.

Here then I stand, as I said, beside the fleet waters of the flowing
years, and now away! Spread the sail, and strain with oar, hurrying by
dark impending crags, adown steep rapids, even to the sea of desolation
I have reached. Yet one moment, one brief interval before I put from
shore— once, once again let me fancy myself as I was in 2094 in my
abode at Windsor, let me close my eyes, and imagine that the
immeasurable boughs of its oaks still shadow me, its castle walls
anear. Let fancy pourtray the joyous scene of the twentieth of June,
such as even now my aching heart recalls it.

Circumstances had called me to London; here I heard talk that symptoms
of the plague had occurred in hospitals of that city. I returned to
Windsor; my brow was clouded, my heart heavy; I entered the Little
Park, as was my custom, at the Frogmore gate, on my way to the Castle.
A great part of these grounds had been given to cultivation, and strips
of potatoe-land and corn were scattered here and there. The rooks cawed
loudly in the trees above; mixed with their hoarse cries I heard a
lively strain of music. It was Alfred’s birthday. The young people, the
Etonians, and children of the neighbouring gentry, held a mock fair, to
which all the country people were invited. The park was speckled by
tents, whose flaunting colours and gaudy flags, waving in the sunshine,
added to the gaiety of the scene. On a platform erected beneath the
terrace, a number of the younger part of the assembly were dancing. I
leaned against a tree to observe them. The band played the wild eastern
air of Weber introduced in Abon Hassan; its volatile notes gave wings
to the feet of the dancers, while the lookers-on unconsciously beat
time. At first the tripping measure lifted my spirit with it, and for a
moment my eyes gladly followed the mazes of the dance. The revulsion of
thought passed like keen steel to my heart. Ye are all going to die, I
thought; already your tomb is built up around you. Awhile, because you
are gifted with agility and strength, you fancy that you live: but
frail is the “bower of flesh” that encaskets life; dissoluble the
silver cord that binds you to it. The joyous soul, charioted from
pleasure to pleasure by the graceful mechanism of well-formed limbs,
will suddenly feel the axle-tree give way, and spring and wheel
dissolve in dust. Not one of you, O! fated crowd, can escape—not one!
not my own ones! not my Idris and her babes! Horror and misery! Already
the gay dance vanished, the green sward was strewn with corpses, the
blue air above became fetid with deathly exhalations. Shriek, ye
clarions! ye loud trumpets, howl! Pile dirge on dirge; rouse the
funereal chords; let the air ring with dire wailing; let wild discord
rush on the wings of the wind! Already I hear it, while guardian
angels, attendant on humanity, their task achieved, hasten away, and
their departure is announced by melancholy strains; faces all unseemly
with weeping, forced open my lids; faster and faster many groups of
these woe-begone countenances thronged around, exhibiting every variety
of wretchedness—well known faces mingled with the distorted creations
of fancy. Ashy pale, Raymond and Perdita sat apart, looking on with sad
smiles. Adrian’s countenance flitted across, tainted by death—Idris,
with eyes languidly closed and livid lips, was about to slide into the
wide grave. The confusion grew—their looks of sorrow changed to
mockery; they nodded their heads in time to the music, whose clang
became maddening.

I felt that this was insanity—I sprang forward to throw it off; I
rushed into the midst of the crowd. Idris saw me: with light step she
advanced; as I folded her in my arms, feeling, as I did, that I thus
enclosed what was to me a world, yet frail as the waterdrop which the
noon-day sun will drink from the water lily’s cup; tears filled my
eyes, unwont to be thus moistened. The joyful welcome of my boys, the
soft gratulation of Clara, the pressure of Adrian’s hand, contributed
to unman me. I felt that they were near, that they were safe, yet
methought this was all deceit;—the earth reeled, the firm-enrooted
trees moved—dizziness came over me—I sank to the ground.

My beloved friends were alarmed—nay, they expressed their alarm so
anxiously, that I dared not pronounce the word _plague_, that hovered
on my lips, lest they should construe my perturbed looks into a
symptom, and see infection in my languor. I had scarcely recovered, and
with feigned hilarity had brought back smiles into my little circle,
when we saw Ryland approach.

Ryland had something the appearance of a farmer; of a man whose muscles
and full grown stature had been developed under the influence of
vigorous exercise and exposure to the elements. This was to a great
degree the case: for, though a large landed proprietor, yet, being a
projector, and of an ardent and industrious disposition, he had on his
own estate given himself up to agricultural labours. When he went as
ambassador to the Northern States of America, he, for some time,
planned his entire migration; and went so far as to make several
journies far westward on that immense continent, for the purpose of
choosing the site of his new abode. Ambition turned his thoughts from
these designs—ambition, which labouring through various lets and
hindrances, had now led him to the summit of his hopes, in making him
Lord Protector of England.

His countenance was rough but intelligent—his ample brow and quick grey
eyes seemed to look out, over his own plans, and the opposition of his
enemies. His voice was stentorian: his hand stretched out in debate,
seemed by its gigantic and muscular form, to warn his hearers that
words were not his only weapons. Few people had discovered some
cowardice and much infirmity of purpose under this imposing exterior.
No man could crush a “butterfly on the wheel” with better effect; no
man better cover a speedy retreat from a powerful adversary. This had
been the secret of his secession at the time of Lord Raymond’s
election. In the unsteady glance of his eye, in his extreme desire to
learn the opinions of all, in the feebleness of his hand-writing, these
qualities might be obscurely traced, but they were not generally known.
He was now our Lord Protector. He had canvassed eagerly for this post.
His protectorate was to be distinguished by every kind of innovation on
the aristocracy. This his selected task was exchanged for the far
different one of encountering the ruin caused by the convulsions of
physical nature. He was incapable of meeting these evils by any
comprehensive system; he had resorted to expedient after expedient, and
could never be induced to put a remedy in force, till it came too late
to be of use.

Certainly the Ryland that advanced towards us now, bore small
resemblance to the powerful, ironical, seemingly fearless canvasser for
the first rank among Englishmen. Our native oak, as his partisans
called him, was visited truly by a nipping winter. He scarcely appeared
half his usual height; his joints were unknit, his limbs would not
support him; his face was contracted, his eye wandering; debility of
purpose and dastard fear were expressed in every gesture.

In answer to our eager questions, one word alone fell, as it were
involuntarily, from his convulsed lips: _The Plague_.—“Where?”—“Every
where—we must fly—all fly—but whither? No man can tell—there is no
refuge on earth, it comes on us like a thousand packs of wolves—we must
all fly—where shall you go? Where can any of us go?”

These words were syllabled trembling by the iron man. Adrian replied,
“Whither indeed would you fly? We must all remain; and do our best to
help our suffering fellow-creatures.”

“Help!” said Ryland, “there is no help!—great God, who talks of help!
All the world has the plague!”

“Then to avoid it, we must quit the world,” observed Adrian, with a
gentle smile.

Ryland groaned; cold drops stood on his brow. It was useless to oppose
his paroxysm of terror: but we soothed and encouraged him, so that
after an interval he was better able to explain to us the ground of his
alarm. It had come sufficiently home to him. One of his servants, while
waiting on him, had suddenly fallen down dead. The physician declared
that he died of the plague. We endeavoured to calm him—but our own
hearts were not calm. I saw the eye of Idris wander from me to her
children, with an anxious appeal to my judgment. Adrian was absorbed in
meditation. For myself, I own that Ryland’s words rang in my ears; all
the world was infected;—in what uncontaminated seclusion could I save
my beloved treasures, until the shadow of death had passed from over
the earth? We sunk into silence: a silence that drank in the doleful
accounts and prognostications of our guest. We had receded from the
crowd; and ascending the steps of the terrace, sought the Castle. Our
change of cheer struck those nearest to us; and, by means of Ryland’s
servants, the report soon spread that he had fled from the plague in
London. The sprightly parties broke up—they assembled in whispering
groups. The spirit of gaiety was eclipsed; the music ceased; the young
people left their occupations and gathered together. The lightness of
heart which had dressed them in masquerade habits, had decorated their
tents, and assembled them in fantastic groups, appeared a sin against,
and a provocative to, the awful destiny that had laid its palsying hand
upon hope and life. The merriment of the hour was an unholy mockery of
the sorrows of man. The foreigners whom we had among us, who had fled
from the plague in their own country, now saw their last asylum
invaded; and, fear making them garrulous, they described to eager
listeners the miseries they had beheld in cities visited by the
calamity, and gave fearful accounts of the insidious and irremediable
nature of the disease.

We had entered the Castle. Idris stood at a window that over-looked the
park; her maternal eyes sought her own children among the young crowd.
An Italian lad had got an audience about him, and with animated
gestures was describing some scene of horror. Alfred stood immoveable
before him, his whole attention absorbed. Little Evelyn had endeavoured
to draw Clara away to play with him; but the Italian’s tale arrested
her, she crept near, her lustrous eyes fixed on the speaker. Either
watching the crowd in the park, or occupied by painful reflection, we
were all silent; Ryland stood by himself in an embrasure of the window;
Adrian paced the hall, revolving some new and overpowering
idea—suddenly he stopped and said: “I have long expected this; could we
in reason expect that this island should be exempt from the universal
visitation? The evil is come home to us, and we must not shrink from
our fate. What are your plans, my Lord Protector, for the benefit of
our country?”

“For heaven’s love! Windsor,” cried Ryland, “do not mock me with that
title. Death and disease level all men. I neither pretend to protect
nor govern an hospital—such will England quickly become.”

“Do you then intend, now in time of peril, to recede from your duties?”

“Duties! speak rationally, my Lord!—when I am a plague-spotted corpse,
where will my duties be? Every man for himself! the devil take the
protectorship, say I, if it expose me to danger!”

“Faint-hearted man!” cried Adrian indignantly—“Your countrymen put
their trust in you, and you betray them!”

“I betray them!” said Ryland, “the plague betrays me. Faint-hearted! It
is well, shut up in your castle, out of danger, to boast yourself out
of fear. Take the Protectorship who will; before God I renounce it!”

“And before God,” replied his opponent, fervently, “do I receive it! No
one will canvass for this honour now—none envy my danger or labours.
Deposit your powers in my hands. Long have I fought with death, and
much” (he stretched out his thin hand) “much have I suffered in the
struggle. It is not by flying, but by facing the enemy, that we can
conquer. If my last combat is now about to be fought, and I am to be
worsted—so let it be!”

“But come, Ryland, recollect yourself! Men have hitherto thought you
magnanimous and wise, will you cast aside these titles? Consider the
panic your departure will occasion. Return to London. I will go with
you. Encourage the people by your presence. I will incur all the
danger. Shame! shame! if the first magistrate of England be foremost to
renounce his duties.”

Meanwhile among our guests in the park, all thoughts of festivity had
faded. As summer-flies are scattered by rain, so did this congregation,
late noisy and happy, in sadness and melancholy murmurs break up,
dwindling away apace. With the set sun and the deepening twilight the
park became nearly empty. Adrian and Ryland were still in earnest
discussion. We had prepared a banquet for our guests in the lower hall
of the castle; and thither Idris and I repaired to receive and
entertain the few that remained. There is nothing more melancholy than
a merry-meeting thus turned to sorrow: the gala dresses—the
decorations, gay as they might otherwise be, receive a solemn and
funereal appearance. If such change be painful from lighter causes, it
weighed with intolerable heaviness from the knowledge that the earth’s
desolator had at last, even as an arch-fiend, lightly over-leaped the
boundaries our precautions raised, and at once enthroned himself in the
full and beating heart of our country. Idris sat at the top of the
half-empty hall. Pale and tearful, she almost forgot her duties as
hostess; her eyes were fixed on her children. Alfred’s serious air
shewed that he still revolved the tragic story related by the Italian
boy. Evelyn was the only mirthful creature present: he sat on Clara’s
lap; and, making matter of glee from his own fancies, laughed aloud.
The vaulted roof echoed again his infant tone. The poor mother who had
brooded long over, and suppressed the expression of her anguish, now
burst into tears, and folding her babe in her arms, hurried from the
hall. Clara and Alfred followed. While the rest of the company, in
confused murmur, which grew louder and louder, gave voice to their many
fears.

The younger part gathered round me to ask my advice; and those who had
friends in London were anxious beyond the rest, to ascertain the
present extent of disease in the metropolis. I encouraged them with
such thoughts of cheer as presented themselves. I told them exceedingly
few deaths had yet been occasioned by pestilence, and gave them hopes,
as we were the last visited, so the calamity might have lost its most
venomous power before it had reached us. The cleanliness, habits of
order, and the manner in which our cities were built, were all in our
favour. As it was an epidemic, its chief force was derived from
pernicious qualities in the air, and it would probably do little harm
where this was naturally salubrious. At first, I had spoken only to
those nearest me; but the whole assembly gathered about me, and I found
that I was listened to by all. “My friends,” I said, “our risk is
common; our precautions and exertions shall be common also. If manly
courage and resistance can save us, we will be saved. We will fight the
enemy to the last. Plague shall not find us a ready prey; we will
dispute every inch of ground; and, by methodical and inflexible laws,
pile invincible barriers to the progress of our foe. Perhaps in no part
of the world has she met with so systematic and determined an
opposition. Perhaps no country is naturally so well protected against
our invader; nor has nature anywhere been so well assisted by the hand
of man. We will not despair. We are neither cowards nor fatalists; but,
believing that God has placed the means for our preservation in our own
hands, we will use those means to our utmost. Remember that
cleanliness, sobriety, and even good-humour and benevolence, are our
best medicines.”

There was little I could add to this general exhortation; for the
plague, though in London, was not among us. I dismissed the guests
therefore; and they went thoughtful, more than sad, to await the events
in store for them.

I now sought Adrian, anxious to hear the result of his discussion with
Ryland. He had in part prevailed; the Lord Protector consented to
return to London for a few weeks; during which time things should be so
arranged, as to occasion less consternation at his departure. Adrian
and Idris were together. The sadness with which the former had first
heard that the plague was in London had vanished; the energy of his
purpose informed his body with strength, the solemn joy of enthusiasm
and self-devotion illuminated his countenance; and the weakness of his
physical nature seemed to pass from him, as the cloud of humanity did,
in the ancient fable, from the divine lover of Semele. He was
endeavouring to encourage his sister, and to bring her to look on his
intent in a less tragic light than she was prepared to do; and with
passionate eloquence he unfolded his designs to her.

“Let me, at the first word,” he said, “relieve your mind from all fear
on my account. I will not task myself beyond my powers, nor will I
needlessly seek danger. I feel that I know what ought to be done, and
as my presence is necessary for the accomplishment of my plans, I will
take especial care to preserve my life.

“I am now going to undertake an office fitted for me. I cannot
intrigue, or work a tortuous path through the labyrinth of men’s vices
and passions; but I can bring patience, and sympathy, and such aid as
art affords, to the bed of disease; I can raise from earth the
miserable orphan, and awaken to new hopes the shut heart of the
mourner. I can enchain the plague in limits, and set a term to the
misery it would occasion; courage, forbearance, and watchfulness, are
the forces I bring towards this great work.

“O, I shall be something now! From my birth I have aspired like the
eagle —but, unlike the eagle, my wings have failed, and my vision has
been blinded. Disappointment and sickness have hitherto held dominion
over me; twin born with me, my _would_, was for ever enchained by the
_shall not_, of these my tyrants. A shepherd-boy that tends a silly
flock on the mountains, was more in the scale of society than I.
Congratulate me then that I have found fitting scope for my powers. I
have often thought of offering my services to the pestilence-stricken
towns of France and Italy; but fear of paining you, and expectation of
this catastrophe, withheld me. To England and to Englishmen I dedicate
myself. If I can save one of her mighty spirits from the deadly shaft;
if I can ward disease from one of her smiling cottages, I shall not
have lived in vain.”

Strange ambition this! Yet such was Adrian. He appeared given up to
contemplation, averse to excitement, a lowly student, a man of visions—
but afford him worthy theme, and—

Like to the lark at break of day arising,
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate.[7]


so did he spring up from listlessness and unproductive thought, to the
highest pitch of virtuous action.

With him went enthusiasm, the high-wrought resolve, the eye that
without blenching could look at death. With us remained sorrow,
anxiety, and unendurable expectation of evil. The man, says Lord Bacon,
who hath wife and children, has given hostages to fortune. Vain was all
philosophical reasoning—vain all fortitude—vain, vain, a reliance on
probable good. I might heap high the scale with logic, courage, and
resignation—but let one fear for Idris and our children enter the
opposite one, and, over-weighed, it kicked the beam.

The plague was in London! Fools that we were not long ago to have
foreseen this. We wept over the ruin of the boundless continents of the
east, and the desolation of the western world; while we fancied that
the little channel between our island and the rest of the earth was to
preserve us alive among the dead. It were no mighty leap methinks from
Calais to Dover. The eye easily discerns the sister land; they were
united once; and the little path that runs between looks in a map but
as a trodden footway through high grass. Yet this small interval was to
save us: the sea was to rise a wall of adamant—without, disease and
misery—within, a shelter from evil, a nook of the garden of paradise—a
particle of celestial soil, which no evil could invade—truly we were
wise in our generation, to imagine all these things!

But we are awake now. The plague is in London; the air of England is
tainted, and her sons and daughters strew the unwholesome earth. And
now, the sea, late our defence, seems our prison bound; hemmed in by
its gulphs, we shall die like the famished inhabitants of a besieged
town. Other nations have a fellowship in death; but we, shut out from
all neighbourhood, must bury our own dead, and little England become a
wide, wide tomb.

This feeling of universal misery assumed concentration and shape, when
I looked on my wife and children; and the thought of danger to them
possessed my whole being with fear. How could I save them? I revolved a
thousand and a thousand plans. They should not die—first I would be
gathered to nothingness, ere infection should come anear these idols of
my soul. I would walk barefoot through the world, to find an uninfected
spot; I would build my home on some wave-tossed plank, drifted about on
the barren, shoreless ocean. I would betake me with them to some wild
beast’s den, where a tyger’s cubs, which I would slay, had been reared
in health. I would seek the mountain eagle’s eirie, and live years
suspended in some inaccessible recess of a sea-bounding cliff—no labour
too great, no scheme too wild, if it promised life to them. O! ye
heart-strings of mine, could ye be torn asunder, and my soul not spend
itself in tears of blood for sorrow!

Idris, after the first shock, regained a portion of fortitude. She
studiously shut out all prospect of the future, and cradled her heart
in present blessings. She never for a moment lost sight of her
children. But while they in health sported about her, she could cherish
contentment and hope. A strange and wild restlessness came over me—the
more intolerable, because I was forced to conceal it. My fears for
Adrian were ceaseless; August had come; and the symptoms of plague
encreased rapidly in London. It was deserted by all who possessed the
power of removing; and he, the brother of my soul, was exposed to the
perils from which all but slaves enchained by circumstance fled. He
remained to combat the fiend—his side unguarded, his toils
unshared—infection might even reach him, and he die unattended and
alone. By day and night these thoughts pursued me. I resolved to visit
London, to see him; to quiet these agonizing throes by the sweet
medicine of hope, or the opiate of despair.

It was not until I arrived at Brentford, that I perceived much change
in the face of the country. The better sort of houses were shut up; the
busy trade of the town palsied; there was an air of anxiety among the
few passengers I met, and they looked wonderingly at my carriage—the
first they had seen pass towards London, since pestilence sat on its
high places, and possessed its busy streets. I met several funerals;
they were slenderly attended by mourners, and were regarded by the
spectators as omens of direst import. Some gazed on these processions
with wild eagerness— others fled timidly—some wept aloud.

Adrian’s chief endeavour, after the immediate succour of the sick, had
been to disguise the symptoms and progress of the plague from the
inhabitants of London. He knew that fear and melancholy forebodings
were powerful assistants to disease; that desponding and brooding care
rendered the physical nature of man peculiarly susceptible of
infection. No unseemly sights were therefore discernible: the shops
were in general open, the concourse of passengers in some degree kept
up. But although the appearance of an infected town was avoided, to me,
who had not beheld it since the commencement of the visitation, London
appeared sufficiently changed. There were no carriages, and grass had
sprung high in the streets; the houses had a desolate look; most of the
shutters were closed; and there was a ghast and frightened stare in the
persons I met, very different from the usual business-like demeanour of
the Londoners. My solitary carriage attracted notice, as it rattled
along towards the Protectoral Palace—and the fashionable streets
leading to it wore a still more dreary and deserted appearance. I found
Adrian’s anti-chamber crowded—it was his hour for giving audience. I
was unwilling to disturb his labours, and waited, watching the ingress
and egress of the petitioners. They consisted of people of the middling
and lower classes of society, whose means of subsistence failed with
the cessation of trade, and of the busy spirit of money-making in all
its branches, peculiar to our country. There was an air of anxiety,
sometimes of terror in the new-comers, strongly contrasted with the
resigned and even satisfied mien of those who had had audience. I could
read the influence of my friend in their quickened motions and cheerful
faces. Two o’clock struck, after which none were admitted; those who
had been disappointed went sullenly or sorrowfully away, while I
entered the audience-chamber.

I was struck by the improvement that appeared in the health of Adrian.
He was no longer bent to the ground, like an over-nursed flower of
spring, that, shooting up beyond its strength, is weighed down even by
its own coronal of blossoms. His eyes were bright, his countenance
composed, an air of concentrated energy was diffused over his whole
person, much unlike its former languor. He sat at a table with several
secretaries, who were arranging petitions, or registering the notes
made during that day’s audience. Two or three petitioners were still in
attendance. I admired his justice and patience. Those who possessed a
power of living out of London, he advised immediately to quit it,
affording them the means of so doing. Others, whose trade was
beneficial to the city, or who possessed no other refuge, he provided
with advice for better avoiding the epidemic; relieving overloaded
families, supplying the gaps made in others by death. Order, comfort,
and even health, rose under his influence, as from the touch of a
magician’s wand.

“I am glad you are come,” he said to me, when we were at last alone; “I
can only spare a few minutes, and must tell you much in that time. The
plague is now in progress—it is useless closing one’s eyes to the
fact—the deaths encrease each week. What will come I cannot guess. As
yet, thank God, I am equal to the government of the town; and I look
only to the present. Ryland, whom I have so long detained, has
stipulated that I shall suffer him to depart before the end of this
month. The deputy appointed by parliament is dead; another therefore
must be named; I have advanced my claim, and I believe that I shall
have no competitor. To-night the question is to be decided, as there is
a call of the house for the purpose. You must nominate me, Lionel;
Ryland, for shame, cannot shew himself; but you, my friend, will do me
this service?”

How lovely is devotion! Here was a youth, royally sprung, bred in
luxury, by nature averse to the usual struggles of a public life, and
now, in time of danger, at a period when to live was the utmost scope
of the ambitious, he, the beloved and heroic Adrian, made, in sweet
simplicity, an offer to sacrifice himself for the public good. The very
idea was generous and noble,—but, beyond this, his unpretending manner,
his entire want of the assumption of a virtue, rendered his act ten
times more touching. I would have withstood his request; but I had seen
the good he diffused; I felt that his resolves were not to be shaken,
so, with an heavy heart, I consented to do as he asked. He grasped my
hand affectionately:—“Thank you,” he said, “you have relieved me from a
painful dilemma, and are, as you ever were, the best of my friends.
Farewell—I must now leave you for a few hours. Go you and converse with
Ryland. Although he deserts his post in London, he may be of the
greatest service in the north of England, by receiving and assisting
travellers, and contributing to supply the metropolis with food. Awaken
him, I entreat you, to some sense of duty.”

Adrian left me, as I afterwards learnt, upon his daily task of visiting
the hospitals, and inspecting the crowded parts of London. I found
Ryland much altered, even from what he had been when he visited
Windsor. Perpetual fear had jaundiced his complexion, and shrivelled
his whole person. I told him of the business of the evening, and a
smile relaxed the contracted muscles. He desired to go; each day he
expected to be infected by pestilence, each day he was unable to resist
the gentle violence of Adrian’s detention. The moment Adrian should be
legally elected his deputy, he would escape to safety. Under this
impression he listened to all I said; and, elevated almost to joy by
the near prospect of his departure, he entered into a discussion
concerning the plans he should adopt in his own county, forgetting, for
the moment, his cherished resolution of shutting himself up from all
communication in the mansion and grounds of his estate.

In the evening, Adrian and I proceeded to Westminster. As we went he
reminded me of what I was to say and do, yet, strange to say, I entered
the chamber without having once reflected on my purpose. Adrian
remained in the coffee-room, while I, in compliance with his desire,
took my seat in St. Stephen’s. There reigned unusual silence in the
chamber. I had not visited it since Raymond’s protectorate; a period
conspicuous for a numerous attendance of members, for the eloquence of
the speakers, and the warmth of the debate. The benches were very
empty, those by custom occupied by the hereditary members were vacant;
the city members were there—the members for the commercial towns, few
landed proprietors, and not many of those who entered parliament for
the sake of a career. The first subject that occupied the attention of
the house was an address from the Lord Protector, praying them to
appoint a deputy during a necessary absence on his part.

A silence prevailed, till one of the members coming to me, whispered
that the Earl of Windsor had sent him word that I was to move his
election, in the absence of the person who had been first chosen for
this office. Now for the first time I saw the full extent of my task,
and I was overwhelmed by what I had brought on myself. Ryland had
deserted his post through fear of the plague: from the same fear Adrian
had no competitor. And I, the nearest kinsman of the Earl of Windsor,
was to propose his election. I was to thrust this selected and
matchless friend into the post of danger— impossible! the die was
cast—I would offer myself as candidate.

The few members who were present, had come more for the sake of
terminating the business by securing a legal attendance, than under the
idea of a debate. I had risen mechanically—my knees trembled;
irresolution hung on my voice, as I uttered a few words on the
necessity of choosing a person adequate to the dangerous task in hand.
But, when the idea of presenting myself in the room of my friend
intruded, the load of doubt and pain was taken from off me. My words
flowed spontaneously—my utterance was firm and quick. I adverted to
what Adrian had already done—I promised the same vigilance in
furthering all his views. I drew a touching picture of his vacillating
health; I boasted of my own strength. I prayed them to save even from
himself this scion of the noblest family in England. My alliance with
him was the pledge of my sincerity, my union with his sister, my
children, his presumptive heirs, were the hostages of my truth.

This unexpected turn in the debate was quickly communicated to Adrian.
He hurried in, and witnessed the termination of my impassioned
harangue. I did not see him: my soul was in my words,—my eyes could not
perceive that which was; while a vision of Adrian’s form, tainted by
pestilence, and sinking in death, floated before them. He seized my
hand, as I concluded— “Unkind!” he cried, “you have betrayed me!” then,
springing forwards, with the air of one who had a right to command, he
claimed the place of deputy as his own. He had bought it, he said, with
danger, and paid for it with toil. His ambition rested there; and,
after an interval devoted to the interests of his country, was I to
step in, and reap the profit? Let them remember what London had been
when he arrived: the panic that prevailed brought famine, while every
moral and legal tie was loosened. He had restored order—this had been a
work which required perseverance, patience, and energy; and he had
neither slept nor waked but for the good of his country.—Would they
dare wrong him thus? Would they wrest his hard-earned reward from him,
to bestow it on one, who, never having mingled in public life, would
come a tyro to the craft, in which he was an adept. He demanded the
place of deputy as his right. Ryland had shewn that he preferred him.
Never before had he, who was born even to the inheritance of the throne
of England, never had he asked favour or honour from those now his
equals, but who might have been his subjects. Would they refuse him?
Could they thrust back from the path of distinction and laudable
ambition, the heir of their ancient kings, and heap another
disappointment on a fallen house.

No one had ever before heard Adrian allude to the rights of his
ancestors. None had ever before suspected, that power, or the suffrage
of the many, could in any manner become dear to him. He had begun his
speech with vehemence; he ended with unassuming gentleness, making his
appeal with the same humility, as if he had asked to be the first in
wealth, honour, and power among Englishmen, and not, as was the truth,
to be the foremost in the ranks of loathsome toils and inevitable
death. A murmur of approbation rose after his speech. “Oh, do not
listen to him,” I cried, “he speaks false—false to himself,”—I was
interrupted: and, silence being restored, we were ordered, as was the
custom, to retire during the decision of the house. I fancied that they
hesitated, and that there was some hope for me—I was mistaken—hardly
had we quitted the chamber, before Adrian was recalled, and installed
in his office of Lord Deputy to the Protector.

We returned together to the palace. “Why, Lionel,” said Adrian, “what
did you intend? you could not hope to conquer, and yet you gave me the
pain of a triumph over my dearest friend.”

“This is mockery,” I replied, “you devote yourself,—you, the adored
brother of Idris, the being, of all the world contains, dearest to our
hearts—you devote yourself to an early death. I would have prevented
this; my death would be a small evil—or rather I should not die; while
you cannot hope to escape.”

“As to the likelihood of escaping,” said Adrian, “ten years hence the
cold stars may shine on the graves of all of us; but as to my peculiar
liability to infection, I could easily prove, both logically and
physically, that in the midst of contagion I have a better chance of
life than you.

“This is my post: I was born for this—to rule England in anarchy, to
save her in danger—to devote myself for her. The blood of my
forefathers cries aloud in my veins, and bids me be first among my
countrymen. Or, if this mode of speech offend you, let me say, that my
mother, the proud queen, instilled early into me a love of distinction,
and all that, if the weakness of my physical nature and my peculiar
opinions had not prevented such a design, might have made me long since
struggle for the lost inheritance of my race. But now my mother, or, if
you will, my mother’s lessons, awaken within me. I cannot lead on to
battle; I cannot, through intrigue and faithlessness rear again the
throne upon the wreck of English public spirit. But I can be the first
to support and guard my country, now that terrific disasters and ruin
have laid strong hands upon her.

“That country and my beloved sister are all I have. I will protect the
first—the latter I commit to your charge. If I survive, and she be
lost, I were far better dead. Preserve her—for her own sake I know that
you will—if you require any other spur, think that, in preserving her,
you preserve me. Her faultless nature, one sum of perfections, is wrapt
up in her affections—if they were hurt, she would droop like an
unwatered floweret, and the slightest injury they receive is a nipping
frost to her. Already she fears for us. She fears for the children she
adores, and for you, the father of these, her lover, husband,
protector; and you must be near her to support and encourage her.
Return to Windsor then, my brother; for such you are by every tie—fill
the double place my absence imposes on you, and let me, in all my
sufferings here, turn my eyes towards that dear seclusion, and
say—There is peace.”

 [7] Shakespeare’s Sonnets.




CHAPTER VII.


I did proceed to Windsor, but not with the intention of remaining
there. I went but to obtain the consent of Idris, and then to return
and take my station beside my unequalled friend; to share his labours,
and save him, if so it must be, at the expence of my life. Yet I
dreaded to witness the anguish which my resolve might excite in Idris.
I had vowed to my own heart never to shadow her countenance even with
transient grief, and should I prove recreant at the hour of greatest
need? I had begun my journey with anxious haste; now I desired to draw
it out through the course of days and months. I longed to avoid the
necessity of action; I strove to escape from thought—vainly—futurity,
like a dark image in a phantasmagoria, came nearer and more near, till
it clasped the whole earth in its shadow.

A slight circumstance induced me to alter my usual route, and to return
home by Egham and Bishopgate. I alighted at Perdita’s ancient abode,
her cottage; and, sending forward the carriage, determined to walk
across the park to the castle. This spot, dedicated to sweetest
recollections, the deserted house and neglected garden were well
adapted to nurse my melancholy. In our happiest days, Perdita had
adorned her cottage with every aid art might bring, to that which
nature had selected to favour. In the same spirit of exaggeration she
had, on the event of her separation from Raymond, caused it to be
entirely neglected. It was now in ruin: the deer had climbed the broken
palings, and reposed among the flowers; grass grew on the threshold,
and the swinging lattice creaking to the wind, gave signal of utter
desertion. The sky was blue above, and the air impregnated with
fragrance by the rare flowers that grew among the weeds. The trees
moved overhead, awakening nature’s favourite melody—but the melancholy
appearance of the choaked paths, and weed-grown flower-beds, dimmed
even this gay summer scene. The time when in proud and happy security
we assembled at this cottage, was gone—soon the present hours would
join those past, and shadows of future ones rose dark and menacing from
the womb of time, their cradle and their bier. For the first time in my
life I envied the sleep of the dead, and thought with pleasure of one’s
bed under the sod, where grief and fear have no power. I passed through
the gap of the broken paling—I felt, while I disdained, the choaking
tears—I rushed into the depths of the forest. O death and change,
rulers of our life, where are ye, that I may grapple with you! What was
there in our tranquillity, that excited your envy—in our happiness,
that ye should destroy it? We were happy, loving, and beloved; the horn
of Amalthea contained no blessing unshowered upon us, but, alas!

        la fortuna
deidad barbara importuna,
oy cadaver y ayer flor,
no permanece jamas![8]


As I wandered on thus ruminating, a number of country people passed me.
They seemed full of careful thought, and a few words of their
conversation that reached me, induced me to approach and make further
enquiries. A party of people flying from London, as was frequent in
those days, had come up the Thames in a boat. No one at Windsor would
afford them shelter; so, going a little further up, they remained all
night in a deserted hut near Bolter’s lock. They pursued their way the
following morning, leaving one of their company behind them, sick of
the plague. This circumstance once spread abroad, none dared approach
within half a mile of the infected neighbourhood, and the deserted
wretch was left to fight with disease and death in solitude, as he best
might. I was urged by compassion to hasten to the hut, for the purpose
of ascertaining his situation, and administering to his wants.

As I advanced I met knots of country-people talking earnestly of this
event: distant as they were from the apprehended contagion, fear was
impressed on every countenance. I passed by a group of these
terrorists, in a lane in the direct road to the hut. One of them
stopped me, and, conjecturing that I was ignorant of the circumstance,
told me not to go on, for that an infected person lay but at a short
distance.

“I know it,” I replied, “and I am going to see in what condition the
poor fellow is.”

A murmur of surprise and horror ran through the assembly. I
continued:—“This poor wretch is deserted, dying, succourless; in these
unhappy times, God knows how soon any or all of us may be in like want.
I am going to do, as I would be done by.”

“But you will never be able to return to the Castle—Lady Idris—his
children—” in confused speech were the words that struck my ear.

“Do you not know, my friends,” I said, “that the Earl himself, now Lord
Protector, visits daily, not only those probably infected by this
disease, but the hospitals and pest houses, going near, and even
touching the sick? yet he was never in better health. You labour under
an entire mistake as to the nature of the plague; but do not fear, I do
not ask any of you to accompany me, nor to believe me, until I return
safe and sound from my patient.”

So I left them, and hurried on. I soon arrived at the hut: the door was
ajar. I entered, and one glance assured me that its former inhabitant
was no more—he lay on a heap of straw, cold and stiff; while a
pernicious effluvia filled the room, and various stains and marks
served to shew the virulence of the disorder.

I had never before beheld one killed by pestilence. While every mind
was full of dismay at its effects, a craving for excitement had led us
to peruse De Foe’s account, and the masterly delineations of the author
of Arthur Mervyn. The pictures drawn in these books were so vivid, that
we seemed to have experienced the results depicted by them. But cold
were the sensations excited by words, burning though they were, and
describing the death and misery of thousands, compared to what I felt
in looking on the corpse of this unhappy stranger. This indeed was the
plague. I raised his rigid limbs, I marked the distortion of his face,
and the stony eyes lost to perception. As I was thus occupied, chill
horror congealed my blood, making my flesh quiver and my hair to stand
on end. Half insanely I spoke to the dead. So the plague killed you, I
muttered. How came this? Was the coming painful? You look as if the
enemy had tortured, before he murdered you. And now I leapt up
precipitately, and escaped from the hut, before nature could revoke her
laws, and inorganic words be breathed in answer from the lips of the
departed.

On returning through the lane, I saw at a distance the same assemblage
of persons which I had left. They hurried away, as soon as they saw me;
my agitated mien added to their fear of coming near one who had entered
within the verge of contagion.

At a distance from facts one draws conclusions which appear infallible,
which yet when put to the test of reality, vanish like unreal dreams. I
had ridiculed the fears of my countrymen, when they related to others;
now that they came home to myself, I paused. The Rubicon, I felt, was
passed; and it behoved me well to reflect what I should do on this
hither side of disease and danger. According to the vulgar
superstition, my dress, my person, the air I breathed, bore in it
mortal danger to myself and others. Should I return to the Castle, to
my wife and children, with this taint upon me? Not surely if I were
infected; but I felt certain that I was not—a few hours would determine
the question—I would spend these in the forest, in reflection on what
was to come, and what my future actions were to be. In the feeling
communicated to me by the sight of one struck by the plague, I forgot
the events that had excited me so strongly in London; new and more
painful prospects, by degrees were cleared of the mist which had
hitherto veiled them. The question was no longer whether I should share
Adrian’s toils and danger; but in what manner I could, in Windsor and
the neighbourhood, imitate the prudence and zeal which, under his
government, produced order and plenty in London, and how, now
pestilence had spread more widely, I could secure the health of my own
family.

I spread the whole earth out as a map before me. On no one spot of its
surface could I put my finger and say, here is safety. In the south,
the disease, virulent and immedicable, had nearly annihilated the race
of man; storm and inundation, poisonous winds and blights, filled up
the measure of suffering. In the north it was worse—the lesser
population gradually declined, and famine and plague kept watch on the
survivors, who, helpless and feeble, were ready to fall an easy prey
into their hands.

I contracted my view to England. The overgrown metropolis, the great
heart of mighty Britain, was pulseless. Commerce had ceased. All resort
for ambition or pleasure was cut off—the streets were grass-grown—the
houses empty—the few, that from necessity remained, seemed already
branded with the taint of inevitable pestilence. In the larger
manufacturing towns the same tragedy was acted on a smaller, yet more
disastrous scale. There was no Adrian to superintend and direct, while
whole flocks of the poor were struck and killed. Yet we were not all to
die. No truly, though thinned, the race of man would continue, and the
great plague would, in after years, become matter of history and
wonder. Doubtless this visitation was for extent unexampled—more need
that we should work hard to dispute its progress; ere this men have
gone out in sport, and slain their thousands and tens of thousands; but
now man had become a creature of price; the life of one of them was of
more worth than the so called treasures of kings. Look at his
thought-endued countenance, his graceful limbs, his majestic brow, his
wondrous mechanism—the type and model of this best work of God is not
to be cast aside as a broken vessel—he shall be preserved, and his
children and his children’s children carry down the name and form of
man to latest time.

Above all I must guard those entrusted by nature and fate to my
especial care. And surely, if among all my fellow-creatures I were to
select those who might stand forth examples of the greatness and
goodness of man, I could choose no other than those allied to me by the
most sacred ties. Some from among the family of man must survive, and
these should be among the survivors; that should be my task—to
accomplish it my own life were a small sacrifice. There then in that
castle—in Windsor Castle, birth-place of Idris and my babes, should be
the haven and retreat for the wrecked bark of human society. Its forest
should be our world—its garden afford us food; within its walls I would
establish the shaken throne of health. I was an outcast and a vagabond,
when Adrian gently threw over me the silver net of love and
civilization, and linked me inextricably to human charities and human
excellence. I was one, who, though an aspirant after good, and an
ardent lover of wisdom, was yet unenrolled in any list of worth, when
Idris, the princely born, who was herself the personification of all
that was divine in woman, she who walked the earth like a poet’s dream,
as a carved goddess endued with sense, or pictured saint stepping from
the canvas—she, the most worthy, chose me, and gave me herself—a
priceless gift.

During several hours I continued thus to meditate, till hunger and
fatigue brought me back to the passing hour, then marked by long
shadows cast from the descending sun. I had wandered towards Bracknel,
far to the west of Windsor. The feeling of perfect health which I
enjoyed, assured me that I was free from contagion. I remembered that
Idris had been kept in ignorance of my proceedings. She might have
heard of my return from London, and my visit to Bolter’s Lock, which,
connected with my continued absence, might tend greatly to alarm her. I
returned to Windsor by the Long Walk, and passing through the town
towards the Castle, I found it in a state of agitation and disturbance.

“It is too late to be ambitious,” says Sir Thomas Browne. “We cannot
hope to live so long in our names as some have done in their persons;
one face of Janus holds no proportion to the other.” Upon this text
many fanatics arose, who prophesied that the end of time was come. The
spirit of superstition had birth, from the wreck of our hopes, and
antics wild and dangerous were played on the great theatre, while the
remaining particle of futurity dwindled into a point in the eyes of the
prognosticators. Weak-spirited women died of fear as they listened to
their denunciations; men of robust form and seeming strength fell into
idiotcy and madness, racked by the dread of coming eternity. A man of
this kind was now pouring forth his eloquent despair among the
inhabitants of Windsor. The scene of the morning, and my visit to the
dead, which had been spread abroad, had alarmed the country-people, so
they had become fit instruments to be played upon by a maniac.

The poor wretch had lost his young wife and lovely infant by the
plague. He was a mechanic; and, rendered unable to attend to the
occupation which supplied his necessities, famine was added to his
other miseries. He left the chamber which contained his wife and
child—wife and child no more, but “dead earth upon the earth”—wild with
hunger, watching and grief, his diseased fancy made him believe himself
sent by heaven to preach the end of time to the world. He entered the
churches, and foretold to the congregations their speedy removal to the
vaults below. He appeared like the forgotten spirit of the time in the
theatres, and bade the spectators go home and die. He had been seized
and confined; he had escaped and wandered from London among the
neighbouring towns, and, with frantic gestures and thrilling words, he
unveiled to each their hidden fears, and gave voice to the soundless
thought they dared not syllable. He stood under the arcade of the
town-hall of Windsor, and from this elevation harangued a trembling
crowd.

“Hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth,” he cried, “hear thou, all
seeing, but most pitiless Heaven! hear thou too, O tempest-tossed
heart, which breathes out these words, yet faints beneath their
meaning! Death is among us! The earth is beautiful and flower-bedecked,
but she is our grave! The clouds of heaven weep for us—the pageantry of
the stars is but our funeral torchlight. Grey headed men, ye hoped for
yet a few years in your long-known abode—but the lease is up, you must
remove—children, ye will never reach maturity, even now the small grave
is dug for ye— mothers, clasp them in your arms, one death embraces
you!”

Shuddering, he stretched out his hands, his eyes cast up, seemed
bursting from their sockets, while he appeared to follow shapes, to us
invisible, in the yielding air—“There they are,” he cried, “the dead!
They rise in their shrouds, and pass in silent procession towards the
far land of their doom—their bloodless lips move not—their shadowy
limbs are void of motion, while still they glide onwards. We come,” he
exclaimed, springing forwards, “for what should we wait? Haste, my
friends, apparel yourselves in the court-dress of death. Pestilence
will usher you to his presence. Why thus long? they, the good, the
wise, and the beloved, are gone before. Mothers, kiss you
last—husbands, protectors no more, lead on the partners of your death!
Come, O come! while the dear ones are yet in sight, for soon they will
pass away, and we never never shall join them more.”

From such ravings as these, he would suddenly become collected, and
with unexaggerated but terrific words, paint the horrors of the time;
describe with minute detail, the effects of the plague on the human
frame, and tell heart-breaking tales of the snapping of dear
affinities—the gasping horror of despair over the death-bed of the last
beloved—so that groans and even shrieks burst from the crowd. One man
in particular stood in front, his eyes fixt on the prophet, his mouth
open, his limbs rigid, while his face changed to various colours,
yellow, blue, and green, through intense fear. The maniac caught his
glance, and turned his eye on him— one has heard of the gaze of the
rattle-snake, which allures the trembling victim till he falls within
his jaws. The maniac became composed; his person rose higher; authority
beamed from his countenance. He looked on the peasant, who began to
tremble, while he still gazed; his knees knocked together; his teeth
chattered. He at last fell down in convulsions. “That man has the
plague,” said the maniac calmly. A shriek burst from the lips of the
poor wretch; and then sudden motionlessness came over him; it was
manifest to all that he was dead.

Cries of horror filled the place—every one endeavoured to effect his
escape—in a few minutes the market place was cleared—the corpse lay on
the ground; and the maniac, subdued and exhausted, sat beside it,
leaning his gaunt cheek upon his thin hand. Soon some people, deputed
by the magistrates, came to remove the body; the unfortunate being saw
a jailor in each—he fled precipitately, while I passed onwards to the
Castle.

Death, cruel and relentless, had entered these beloved walls. An old
servant, who had nursed Idris in infancy, and who lived with us more on
the footing of a revered relative than a domestic, had gone a few days
before to visit a daughter, married, and settled in the neighbourhood
of London. On the night of her return she sickened of the plague. From
the haughty and unbending nature of the Countess of Windsor, Idris had
few tender filial associations with her. This good woman had stood in
the place of a mother, and her very deficiencies of education and
knowledge, by rendering her humble and defenceless, endeared her to
us—she was the especial favourite of the children. I found my poor
girl, there is no exaggeration in the expression, wild with grief and
dread. She hung over the patient in agony, which was not mitigated when
her thoughts wandered towards her babes, for whom she feared infection.
My arrival was like the newly discovered lamp of a lighthouse to
sailors, who are weathering some dangerous point. She deposited her
appalling doubts in my hands; she relied on my judgment, and was
comforted by my participation in her sorrow. Soon our poor nurse
expired; and the anguish of suspense was changed to deep regret, which
though at first more painful, yet yielded with greater readiness to my
consolations. Sleep, the sovereign balm, at length steeped her tearful
eyes in forgetfulness.

She slept; and quiet prevailed in the Castle, whose inhabitants were
hushed to repose. I was awake, and during the long hours of dead night,
my busy thoughts worked in my brain, like ten thousand mill-wheels,
rapid, acute, untameable. All slept—all England slept; and from my
window, commanding a wide prospect of the star-illumined country, I saw
the land stretched out in placid rest. I was awake, alive, while the
brother of death possessed my race. What, if the more potent of these
fraternal deities should obtain dominion over it? The silence of
midnight, to speak truly, though apparently a paradox, rung in my ears.
The solitude became intolerable—I placed my hand on the beating heart
of Idris, I bent my head to catch the sound of her breath, to assure
myself that she still existed—for a moment I doubted whether I should
not awake her; so effeminate an horror ran through my frame.—Great God!
would it one day be thus? One day all extinct, save myself, should I
walk the earth alone? Were these warning voices, whose inarticulate and
oracular sense forced belief upon me?

Yet I would not call _them_
Voices of warning, that announce to us
Only the inevitable. As the sun,
Ere it is risen, sometimes paints its image
In the atmosphere—so often do the spirits
Of great events stride on before the events,
And in to-day already walks to-morrow.[9]


 [8] Calderon de la Barca.


 [9] Coleridge’s Translation of Schiller’s Wallenstein.




CHAPTER VIII.


After a long interval, I am again impelled by the restless spirit
within me to continue my narration; but I must alter the mode which I
have hitherto adopted. The details contained in the foregoing pages,
apparently trivial, yet each slightest one weighing like lead in the
depressed scale of human afflictions; this tedious dwelling on the
sorrows of others, while my own were only in apprehension; this slowly
laying bare of my soul’s wounds: this journal of death; this long drawn
and tortuous path, leading to the ocean of countless tears, awakens me
again to keen grief. I had used this history as an opiate; while it
described my beloved friends, fresh with life and glowing with hope,
active assistants on the scene, I was soothed; there will be a more
melancholy pleasure in painting the end of all. But the intermediate
steps, the climbing the wall, raised up between what was and is, while
I still looked back nor saw the concealed desert beyond, is a labour
past my strength. Time and experience have placed me on an height from
which I can comprehend the past as a whole; and in this way I must
describe it, bringing forward the leading incidents, and disposing
light and shade so as to form a picture in whose very darkness there
will be harmony.

It would be needless to narrate those disastrous occurrences, for which
a parallel might be found in any slighter visitation of our gigantic
calamity. Does the reader wish to hear of the pest-houses, where death
is the comforter—of the mournful passage of the death-cart—of the
insensibility of the worthless, and the anguish of the loving heart—of
harrowing shrieks and silence dire—of the variety of disease,
desertion, famine, despair, and death? There are many books which can
feed the appetite craving for these things; let them turn to the
accounts of Boccaccio, De Foe, and Browne. The vast annihilation that
has swallowed all things—the voiceless solitude of the once busy
earth—the lonely state of singleness which hems me in, has deprived
even such details of their stinging reality, and mellowing the lurid
tints of past anguish with poetic hues, I am able to escape from the
mosaic of circumstance, by perceiving and reflecting back the grouping
and combined colouring of the past.

I had returned from London possessed by the idea, with the intimate
feeling that it was my first duty to secure, as well as I was able, the
well-being of my family, and then to return and take my post beside
Adrian. The events that immediately followed on my arrival at Windsor
changed this view of things. The plague was not in London alone, it was
every where—it came on us, as Ryland had said, like a thousand packs of
wolves, howling through the winter night, gaunt and fierce. When once
disease was introduced into the rural districts, its effects appeared
more horrible, more exigent, and more difficult to cure, than in towns.
There was a companionship in suffering there, and, the neighbours
keeping constant watch on each other, and inspired by the active
benevolence of Adrian, succour was afforded, and the path of
destruction smoothed. But in the country, among the scattered
farm-houses, in lone cottages, in fields, and barns, tragedies were
acted harrowing to the soul, unseen, unheard, unnoticed. Medical aid
was less easily procured, food was more difficult to obtain, and human
beings, unwithheld by shame, for they were unbeheld of their fellows,
ventured on deeds of greater wickedness, or gave way more readily to
their abject fears.

Deeds of heroism also occurred, whose very mention swells the heart and
brings tears into the eyes. Such is human nature, that beauty and
deformity are often closely linked. In reading history we are chiefly
struck by the generosity and self-devotion that follow close on the
heels of crime, veiling with supernal flowers the stain of blood. Such
acts were not wanting to adorn the grim train that waited on the
progress of the plague.

The inhabitants of Berkshire and Bucks had been long aware that the
plague was in London, in Liverpool, Bristol, Manchester, York, in
short, in all the more populous towns of England. They were not however
the less astonished and dismayed when it appeared among themselves.
They were impatient and angry in the midst of terror. They would do
something to throw off the clinging evil, and, while in action, they
fancied that a remedy was applied. The inhabitants of the smaller towns
left their houses, pitched tents in the fields, wandering separate from
each other careless of hunger or the sky’s inclemency, while they
imagined that they avoided the death-dealing disease. The farmers and
cottagers, on the contrary, struck with the fear of solitude, and madly
desirous of medical assistance, flocked into the towns.

But winter was coming, and with winter, hope. In August, the plague had
appeared in the country of England, and during September it made its
ravages. Towards the end of October it dwindled away, and was in some
degree replaced by a typhus, of hardly less virulence. The autumn was
warm and rainy: the infirm and sickly died off—happier they: many young
people flushed with health and prosperity, made pale by wasting malady,
became the inhabitants of the grave. The crop had failed, the bad corn,
and want of foreign wines, added vigour to disease. Before Christmas
half England was under water. The storms of the last winter were
renewed; but the diminished shipping of this year caused us to feel
less the tempests of the sea. The flood and storms did more harm to
continental Europe than to us—giving, as it were, the last blow to the
calamities which destroyed it. In Italy the rivers were unwatched by
the diminished peasantry; and, like wild beasts from their lair when
the hunters and dogs are afar, did Tiber, Arno, and Po, rush upon and
destroy the fertility of the plains. Whole villages were carried away.
Rome, and Florence, and Pisa were overflowed, and their marble palaces,
late mirrored in tranquil streams, had their foundations shaken by
their winter-gifted power. In Germany and Russia the injury was still
more momentous.

But frost would come at last, and with it a renewal of our lease of
earth. Frost would blunt the arrows of pestilence, and enchain the
furious elements; and the land would in spring throw off her garment of
snow, released from her menace of destruction. It was not until
February that the desired signs of winter appeared. For three days the
snow fell, ice stopped the current of the rivers, and the birds flew
out from crackling branches of the frost-whitened trees. On the fourth
morning all vanished. A south-west wind brought up rain—the sun came
out, and mocking the usual laws of nature, seemed even at this early
season to burn with solsticial force. It was no consolation, that with
the first winds of March the lanes were filled with violets, the fruit
trees covered with blossoms, that the corn sprung up, and the leaves
came out, forced by the unseasonable heat. We feared the balmy air—we
feared the cloudless sky, the flower-covered earth, and delightful
woods, for we looked on the fabric of the universe no longer as our
dwelling, but our tomb, and the fragrant land smelled to the
apprehension of fear like a wide church-yard.

Pisando la tierra dura
de continuo el hombre està
y cada passo que dà
es sobre su sepultura.[10]


Yet notwithstanding these disadvantages winter was breathing time; and
we exerted ourselves to make the best of it. Plague might not revive
with the summer; but if it did, it should find us prepared. It is a
part of man’s nature to adapt itself through habit even to pain and
sorrow. Pestilence had become a part of our future, our existence; it
was to be guarded against, like the flooding of rivers, the
encroachments of ocean, or the inclemency of the sky. After long
suffering and bitter experience, some panacea might be discovered; as
it was, all that received infection died— all however were not
infected; and it became our part to fix deep the foundations, and raise
high the barrier between contagion and the sane; to introduce such
order as would conduce to the well-being of the survivors, and as would
preserve hope and some portion of happiness to those who were
spectators of the still renewed tragedy. Adrian had introduced
systematic modes of proceeding in the metropolis, which, while they
were unable to stop the progress of death, yet prevented other evils,
vice and folly, from rendering the awful fate of the hour still more
tremendous. I wished to imitate his example, but men are used to

—move all together, if they move at all,[11]


and I could find no means of leading the inhabitants of scattered towns
and villages, who forgot my words as soon as they heard them not, and
veered with every baffling wind, that might arise from an apparent
change of circumstance.

I adopted another plan. Those writers who have imagined a reign of
peace and happiness on earth, have generally described a rural country,
where each small township was directed by the elders and wise men. This
was the key of my design. Each village, however small, usually contains
a leader, one among themselves whom they venerate, whose advice they
seek in difficulty, and whose good opinion they chiefly value. I was
immediately drawn to make this observation by occurrences that
presented themselves to my personal experience.

In the village of Little Marlow an old woman ruled the community. She
had lived for some years in an alms-house, and on fine Sundays her
threshold was constantly beset by a crowd, seeking her advice and
listening to her admonitions. She had been a soldier’s wife, and had
seen the world; infirmity, induced by fevers caught in unwholesome
quarters, had come on her before its time, and she seldom moved from
her little cot. The plague entered the village; and, while fright and
grief deprived the inhabitants of the little wisdom they possessed, old
Martha stepped forward and said— “Before now I have been in a town
where there was the plague.”—“And you escaped?”—“No, but I
recovered.”—After this Martha was seated more firmly than ever on the
regal seat, elevated by reverence and love. She entered the cottages of
the sick; she relieved their wants with her own hand; she betrayed no
fear, and inspired all who saw her with some portion of her own native
courage. She attended the markets—she insisted upon being supplied with
food for those who were too poor to purchase it. She shewed them how
the well-being of each included the prosperity of all. She would not
permit the gardens to be neglected, nor the very flowers in the cottage
lattices to droop from want of care. Hope, she said, was better than a
doctor’s prescription, and every thing that could sustain and enliven
the spirits, of more worth than drugs and mixtures.

It was the sight of Little Marlow, and my conversations with Martha,
that led me to the plan I formed. I had before visited the manor houses
and gentlemen’s seats, and often found the inhabitants actuated by the
purest benevolence, ready to lend their utmost aid for the welfare of
their tenants. But this was not enough. The intimate sympathy generated
by similar hopes and fears, similar experience and pursuits, was
wanting here. The poor perceived that the rich possessed other means of
preservation than those which could be partaken of by themselves,
seclusion, and, as far as circumstances permitted, freedom from care.
They could not place reliance on them, but turned with tenfold
dependence to the succour and advice of their equals. I resolved
therefore to go from village to village, seeking out the rustic archon
of the place, and by systematizing their exertions, and enlightening
their views, encrease both their power and their use among their
fellow-cottagers. Many changes also now occurred in these spontaneous
regal elections: depositions and abdications were frequent, while, in
the place of the old and prudent, the ardent youth would step forward,
eager for action, regardless of danger. Often too, the voice to which
all listened was suddenly silenced, the helping hand cold, the
sympathetic eye closed, and the villagers feared still more the death
that had selected a choice victim, shivering in dust the heart that had
beat for them, reducing to incommunicable annihilation the mind for
ever occupied with projects for their welfare.

Whoever labours for man must often find ingratitude, watered by vice
and folly, spring from the grain which he has sown. Death, which had in
our younger days walked the earth like “a thief that comes in the
night,” now, rising from his subterranean vault, girt with power, with
dark banner floating, came a conqueror. Many saw, seated above his
vice-regal throne, a supreme Providence, who directed his shafts, and
guided his progress, and they bowed their heads in resignation, or at
least in obedience. Others perceived only a passing casualty; they
endeavoured to exchange terror for heedlessness, and plunged into
licentiousness, to avoid the agonizing throes of worst apprehension.
Thus, while the wise, the good, and the prudent were occupied by the
labours of benevolence, the truce of winter produced other effects
among the young, the thoughtless, and the vicious. During the colder
months there was a general rush to London in search of amusement—the
ties of public opinion were loosened; many were rich, heretofore
poor—many had lost father and mother, the guardians of their morals,
their mentors and restraints. It would have been useless to have
opposed these impulses by barriers, which would only have driven those
actuated by them to more pernicious indulgencies. The theatres were
open and thronged; dance and midnight festival were frequented—in many
of these decorum was violated, and the evils, which hitherto adhered to
an advanced state of civilization, were doubled. The student left his
books, the artist his study: the occupations of life were gone, but the
amusements remained; enjoyment might be protracted to the verge of the
grave. All factitious colouring disappeared—death rose like night, and,
protected by its murky shadows the blush of modesty, the reserve of
pride, the decorum of prudery were frequently thrown aside as useless
veils. This was not universal. Among better natures, anguish and dread,
the fear of eternal separation, and the awful wonder produced by
unprecedented calamity, drew closer the ties of kindred and friendship.
Philosophers opposed their principles, as barriers to the inundation of
profligacy or despair, and the only ramparts to protect the invaded
territory of human life; the religious, hoping now for their reward,
clung fast to their creeds, as the rafts and planks which over the
tempest-vexed sea of suffering, would bear them in safety to the
harbour of the Unknown Continent. The loving heart, obliged to contract
its view, bestowed its overflow of affection in triple portion on the
few that remained. Yet, even among these, the present, as an
unalienable possession, became all of time to which they dared commit
the precious freight of their hopes.

The experience of immemorial time had taught us formerly to count our
enjoyments by years, and extend our prospect of life through a
lengthened period of progression and decay; the long road threaded a
vast labyrinth, and the Valley of the Shadow of Death, in which it
terminated, was hid by intervening objects. But an earthquake had
changed the scene—under our very feet the earth yawned—deep and
precipitous the gulph below opened to receive us, while the hours
charioted us towards the chasm. But it was winter now, and months must
elapse before we are hurled from our security. We became ephemera, to
whom the interval between the rising and setting sun was as a long
drawn year of common time. We should never see our children ripen into
maturity, nor behold their downy cheeks roughen, their blithe hearts
subdued by passion or care; but we had them now—they lived, and we
lived—what more could we desire? With such schooling did my poor Idris
try to hush thronging fears, and in some measure succeeded. It was not
as in summer-time, when each hour might bring the dreaded fate—until
summer, we felt sure; and this certainty, short lived as it must be,
yet for awhile satisfied her maternal tenderness. I know not how to
express or communicate the sense of concentrated, intense, though
evanescent transport, that imparadized us in the present hour. Our joys
were dearer because we saw their end; they were keener because we felt,
to its fullest extent, their value; they were purer because their
essence was sympathy— as a meteor is brighter than a star, did the
felicity of this winter contain in itself the extracted delights of a
long, long life.

How lovely is spring! As we looked from Windsor Terrace on the sixteen
fertile counties spread beneath, speckled by happy cottages and
wealthier towns, all looked as in former years, heart-cheering and
fair. The land was ploughed, the slender blades of wheat broke through
the dark soil, the fruit trees were covered with buds, the husbandman
was abroad in the fields, the milk-maid tripped home with well-filled
pails, the swallows and martins struck the sunny pools with their long,
pointed wings, the new dropped lambs reposed on the young grass, the
tender growth of leaves—

Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds
A silent space with ever sprouting green.[12]


Man himself seemed to regenerate, and feel the frost of winter yield to
an elastic and warm renewal of life—reason told us that care and sorrow
would grow with the opening year—but how to believe the ominous voice
breathed up with pestiferous vapours from fear’s dim cavern, while
nature, laughing and scattering from her green lap flowers, and fruits,
and sparkling waters, invited us to join the gay masque of young life
she led upon the scene?

Where was the plague? “Here—every where!” one voice of horror and
dismay exclaimed, when in the pleasant days of a sunny May the
Destroyer of man brooded again over the earth, forcing the spirit to
leave its organic chrysalis, and to enter upon an untried life. With
one mighty sweep of its potent weapon, all caution, all care, all
prudence were levelled low: death sat at the tables of the great,
stretched itself on the cottager’s pallet, seized the dastard who fled,
quelled the brave man who resisted: despondency entered every heart,
sorrow dimmed every eye.

Sights of woe now became familiar to me, and were I to tell all of
anguish and pain that I witnessed, of the despairing moans of age, and
the more terrible smiles of infancy in the bosom of horror, my reader,
his limbs quivering and his hair on end, would wonder how I did not,
seized with sudden frenzy, dash myself from some precipice, and so
close my eyes for ever on the sad end of the world. But the powers of
love, poetry, and creative fancy will dwell even beside the sick of the
plague, with the squalid, and with the dying. A feeling of devotion, of
duty, of a high and steady purpose, elevated me; a strange joy filled
my heart. In the midst of saddest grief I seemed to tread air, while
the spirit of good shed round me an ambrosial atmosphere, which blunted
the sting of sympathy, and purified the air of sighs. If my wearied
soul flagged in its career, I thought of my loved home, of the casket
that contained my treasures, of the kiss of love and the filial caress,
while my eyes were moistened by purest dew, and my heart was at once
softened and refreshed by thrilling tenderness.

Maternal affection had not rendered Idris selfish; at the beginning of
our calamity she had, with thoughtless enthusiasm, devoted herself to
the care of the sick and helpless. I checked her; and she submitted to
my rule. I told her how the fear of her danger palsied my exertions,
how the knowledge of her safety strung my nerves to endurance. I shewed
her the dangers which her children incurred during her absence; and she
at length agreed not to go beyond the inclosure of the forest. Indeed,
within the walls of the Castle we had a colony of the unhappy, deserted
by their relatives, and in themselves helpless, sufficient to occupy
her time and attention, while ceaseless anxiety for my welfare and the
health of her children, however she strove to curb or conceal it,
absorbed all her thoughts, and undermined the vital principle. After
watching over and providing for their safety, her second care was to
hide from me her anguish and tears. Each night I returned to the
Castle, and found there repose and love awaiting me. Often I waited
beside the bed of death till midnight, and through the obscurity of
rainy, cloudy nights rode many miles, sustained by one circumstance
only, the safety and sheltered repose of those I loved. If some scene
of tremendous agony shook my frame and fevered my brow, I would lay my
head on the lap of Idris, and the tumultuous pulses subsided into a
temperate flow —her smile could raise me from hopelessness, her embrace
bathe my sorrowing heart in calm peace. Summer advanced, and, crowned
with the sun’s potent rays, plague shot her unerring shafts over the
earth. The nations beneath their influence bowed their heads, and died.
The corn that sprung up in plenty, lay in autumn rotting on the ground,
while the melancholy wretch who had gone out to gather bread for his
children, lay stiff and plague-struck in the furrow. The green woods
waved their boughs majestically, while the dying were spread beneath
their shade, answering the solemn melody with inharmonious cries. The
painted birds flitted through the shades; the careless deer reposed
unhurt upon the fern—the oxen and the horses strayed from their
unguarded stables, and grazed among the wheat, for death fell on man
alone.

With summer and mortality grew our fears. My poor love and I looked at
each other, and our babes.—“We will save them, Idris,” I said, “I will
save them. Years hence we shall recount to them our fears, then passed
away with their occasion. Though they only should remain on the earth,
still they shall live, nor shall their cheeks become pale nor their
sweet voices languish.” Our eldest in some degree understood the scenes
passing around, and at times, he with serious looks questioned me
concerning the reason of so vast a desolation. But he was only ten
years old; and the hilarity of youth soon chased unreasonable care from
his brow. Evelyn, a laughing cherub, a gamesome infant, without idea of
pain or sorrow, would, shaking back his light curls from his eyes, make
the halls re-echo with his merriment, and in a thousand artless ways
attract our attention to his play. Clara, our lovely gentle Clara, was
our stay, our solace, our delight. She made it her task to attend the
sick, comfort the sorrowing, assist the aged, and partake the sports
and awaken the gaiety of the young. She flitted through the rooms, like
a good spirit, dispatched from the celestial kingdom, to illumine our
dark hour with alien splendour. Gratitude and praise marked where her
footsteps had been. Yet, when she stood in unassuming simplicity before
us, playing with our children, or with girlish assiduity performing
little kind offices for Idris, one wondered in what fair lineament of
her pure loveliness, in what soft tone of her thrilling voice, so much
of heroism, sagacity and active goodness resided.

The summer passed tediously, for we trusted that winter would at least
check the disease. That it would vanish altogether was an hope too
dear— too heartfelt, to be expressed. When such a thought was
heedlessly uttered, the hearers, with a gush of tears and passionate
sobs, bore witness how deep their fears were, how small their hopes.
For my own part, my exertions for the public good permitted me to
observe more closely than most others, the virulence and extensive
ravages of our sightless enemy. A short month has destroyed a village,
and where in May the first person sickened, in June the paths were
deformed by unburied corpses—the houses tenantless, no smoke arising
from the chimneys; and the housewife’s clock marked only the hour when
death had been triumphant. From such scenes I have sometimes saved a
deserted infant—sometimes led a young and grieving mother from the
lifeless image of her first born, or drawn the sturdy labourer from
childish weeping over his extinct family.

July is gone. August must pass, and by the middle of September we may
hope. Each day was eagerly counted; and the inhabitants of towns,
desirous to leap this dangerous interval, plunged into dissipation, and
strove, by riot, and what they wished to imagine to be pleasure, to
banish thought and opiate despair. None but Adrian could have tamed the
motley population of London, which, like a troop of unbitted steeds
rushing to their pastures, had thrown aside all minor fears, through
the operation of the fear paramount. Even Adrian was obliged in part to
yield, that he might be able, if not to guide, at least to set bounds
to the license of the times. The theatres were kept open; every place
of public resort was frequented; though he endeavoured so to modify
them, as might best quiet the agitation of the spectators, and at the
same time prevent a reaction of misery when the excitement was over.
Tragedies deep and dire were the chief favourites. Comedy brought with
it too great a contrast to the inner despair: when such were attempted,
it was not unfrequent for a comedian, in the midst of the laughter
occasioned by his disporportioned buffoonery, to find a word or thought
in his part that jarred with his own sense of wretchedness, and burst
from mimic merriment into sobs and tears, while the spectators, seized
with irresistible sympathy, wept, and the pantomimic revelry was
changed to a real exhibition of tragic passion.

It was not in my nature to derive consolation from such scenes; from
theatres, whose buffoon laughter and discordant mirth awakened
distempered sympathy, or where fictitious tears and wailings mocked the
heart-felt grief within; from festival or crowded meeting, where
hilarity sprung from the worst feelings of our nature, or such
enthralment of the better ones, as impressed it with garish and false
varnish; from assemblies of mourners in the guise of revellers. Once
however I witnessed a scene of singular interest at one of the
theatres, where nature overpowered art, as an overflowing cataract will
tear away the puny manufacture of a mock cascade, which had before been
fed by a small portion of its waters.

I had come to London to see Adrian. He was not at the palace; and,
though the attendants did not know whither he had gone, they did not
expect him till late at night. It was between six and seven o’clock, a
fine summer afternoon, and I spent my leisure hours in a ramble through
the empty streets of London; now turning to avoid an approaching
funeral, now urged by curiosity to observe the state of a particular
spot; my wanderings were instinct with pain, for silence and desertion
characterized every place I visited, and the few beings I met were so
pale and woe-begone, so marked with care and depressed by fear, that
weary of encountering only signs of misery, I began to retread my steps
towards home.

I was now in Holborn, and passed by a public house filled with
uproarious companions, whose songs, laughter, and shouts were more
sorrowful than the pale looks and silence of the mourner. Such an one
was near, hovering round this house. The sorry plight of her dress
displayed her poverty, she was ghastly pale, and continued approaching,
first the window and then the door of the house, as if fearful, yet
longing to enter. A sudden burst of song and merriment seemed to sting
her to the heart; she murmured, “Can he have the heart?” and then
mustering her courage, she stepped within the threshold. The landlady
met her in the passage; the poor creature asked, “Is my husband here?
Can I see George?”

“See him,” cried the woman, “yes, if you go to him; last night he was
taken with the plague, and we sent him to the hospital.”

The unfortunate inquirer staggered against a wall, a faint cry escaped
her —“O! were you cruel enough,” she exclaimed, “to send him there?”

The landlady meanwhile hurried away; but a more compassionate bar-maid
gave her a detailed account, the sum of which was, that her husband had
been taken ill, after a night of riot, and sent by his boon companions
with all expedition to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital. I had watched this
scene, for there was a gentleness about the poor woman that interested
me; she now tottered away from the door, walking as well as she could
down Holborn Hill; but her strength soon failed her; she leaned against
a wall, and her head sunk on her bosom, while her pallid cheek became
still more white. I went up to her and offered my services. She hardly
looked up—“You can do me no good,” she replied; “I must go to the
hospital; if I do not die before I get there.”

There were still a few hackney-coaches accustomed to stand about the
streets, more truly from habit than for use. I put her in one of these,
and entered with her that I might secure her entrance into the
hospital. Our way was short, and she said little; except interrupted
ejaculations of reproach that he had left her, exclamations on the
unkindness of some of his friends, and hope that she would find him
alive. There was a simple, natural earnestness about her that
interested me in her fate, especially when she assured me that her
husband was the best of men,—had been so, till want of business during
these unhappy times had thrown him into bad company. “He could not bear
to come home,” she said, “only to see our children die. A man cannot
have the patience a mother has, with her own flesh and blood.”

We were set down at St. Bartholomew’s, and entered the wretched
precincts of the house of disease. The poor creature clung closer to
me, as she saw with what heartless haste they bore the dead from the
wards, and took them into a room, whose half-opened door displayed a
number of corpses, horrible to behold by one unaccustomed to such
scenes. We were directed to the ward where her husband had been first
taken, and still was, the nurse said, if alive. My companion looked
eagerly from one bed to the other, till at the end of the ward she
espied, on a wretched bed, a squalid, haggard creature, writhing under
the torture of disease. She rushed towards him, she embraced him,
blessing God for his preservation.

The enthusiasm that inspired her with this strange joy, blinded her to
the horrors about her; but they were intolerably agonizing to me. The
ward was filled with an effluvia that caused my heart to heave with
painful qualms. The dead were carried out, and the sick brought in,
with like indifference; some were screaming with pain, others laughing
from the influence of more terrible delirium; some were attended by
weeping, despairing relations, others called aloud with thrilling
tenderness or reproach on the friends who had deserted them, while the
nurses went from bed to bed, incarnate images of despair, neglect, and
death. I gave gold to my luckless companion; I recommended her to the
care of the attendants; I then hastened away; while the tormentor, the
imagination, busied itself in picturing my own loved ones, stretched on
such beds, attended thus. The country afforded no such mass of horrors;
solitary wretches died in the open fields; and I have found a survivor
in a vacant village, contending at once with famine and disease; but
the assembly of pestilence, the banqueting hall of death, was spread
only in London.

I rambled on, oppressed, distracted by painful emotions—suddenly I
found myself before Drury Lane Theatre. The play was Macbeth—the first
actor of the age was there to exert his powers to drug with
irreflection the auditors; such a medicine I yearned for, so I entered.
The theatre was tolerably well filled. Shakspeare, whose popularity was
established by the approval of four centuries, had not lost his
influence even at this dread period; but was still “Ut magus,” the
wizard to rule our hearts and govern our imaginations. I came in during
the interval between the third and fourth act. I looked round on the
audience; the females were mostly of the lower classes, but the men
were of all ranks, come hither to forget awhile the protracted scenes
of wretchedness, which awaited them at their miserable homes. The
curtain drew up, and the stage presented the scene of the witches’
cave. The wildness and supernatural machinery of Macbeth, was a pledge
that it could contain little directly connected with our present
circumstances. Great pains had been taken in the scenery to give the
semblance of reality to the impossible. The extreme darkness of the
stage, whose only light was received from the fire under the cauldron,
joined to a kind of mist that floated about it, rendered the unearthly
shapes of the witches obscure and shadowy. It was not three decrepid
old hags that bent over their pot throwing in the grim ingredients of
the magic charm, but forms frightful, unreal, and fanciful. The
entrance of Hecate, and the wild music that followed, took us out of
this world. The cavern shape the stage assumed, the beetling rocks, the
glare of the fire, the misty shades that crossed the scene at times,
the music in harmony with all witch-like fancies, permitted the
imagination to revel, without fear of contradiction, or reproof from
reason or the heart. The entrance of Macbeth did not destroy the
illusion, for he was actuated by the same feelings that inspired us,
and while the work of magic proceeded we sympathized in his wonder and
his daring, and gave ourselves up with our whole souls to the influence
of scenic delusion. I felt the beneficial result of such excitement, in
a renewal of those pleasing flights of fancy to which I had long been a
stranger. The effect of this scene of incantation communicated a
portion of its power to that which followed. We forgot that Malcolm and
Macduff were mere human beings, acted upon by such simple passions as
warmed our own breasts. By slow degrees however we were drawn to the
real interest of the scene. A shudder like the swift passing of an
electric shock ran through the house, when Rosse exclaimed, in answer
to “Stands Scotland where it did?”

        Alas, poor country;
Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
Be called our mother, but our grave: where nothing,
But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks that rent the air,
Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems
A modern extasy: the dead man’s knell
Is there scarce asked, for who; and good men’s lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying, or ere they sicken.


Each word struck the sense, as our life’s passing bell; we feared to
look at each other, but bent our gaze on the stage, as if our eyes
could fall innocuous on that alone. The person who played the part of
Rosse, suddenly became aware of the dangerous ground he trod. He was an
inferior actor, but truth now made him excellent; as he went on to
announce to Macduff the slaughter of his family, he was afraid to
speak, trembling from apprehension of a burst of grief from the
audience, not from his fellow-mime. Each word was drawn out with
difficulty; real anguish painted his features; his eyes were now lifted
in sudden horror, now fixed in dread upon the ground. This shew of
terror encreased ours, we gasped with him, each neck was stretched out,
each face changed with the actor’s changes— at length while Macduff,
who, attending to his part, was unobservant of the high wrought
sympathy of the house, cried with well acted passion:

        All my pretty ones?
Did you say all?—O hell kite! All?
What! all my pretty chickens, and their dam,
At one fell swoop!


A pang of tameless grief wrenched every heart, a burst of despair was
echoed from every lip.—I had entered into the universal feeling—I had
been absorbed by the terrors of Rosse—I re-echoed the cry of Macduff,
and then rushed out as from an hell of torture, to find calm in the
free air and silent street.

Free the air was not, or the street silent. Oh, how I longed then for
the dear soothings of maternal Nature, as my wounded heart was still
further stung by the roar of heartless merriment from the public-house,
by the sight of the drunkard reeling home, having lost the memory of
what he would find there in oblivious debauch, and by the more
appalling salutations of those melancholy beings to whom the name of
home was a mockery. I ran on at my utmost speed until I found myself I
knew not how, close to Westminster Abbey, and was attracted by the deep
and swelling tone of the organ. I entered with soothing awe the lighted
chancel, and listened to the solemn religious chaunt, which spoke peace
and hope to the unhappy. The notes, freighted with man’s dearest
prayers, re-echoed through the dim aisles, and the bleeding of the
soul’s wounds was staunched by heavenly balm. In spite of the misery I
deprecated, and could not understand; in spite of the cold hearths of
wide London, and the corpse-strewn fields of my native land; in spite
of all the variety of agonizing emotions I had that evening
experienced, I thought that in reply to our melodious adjurations, the
Creator looked down in compassion and promise of relief; the awful peal
of the heaven-winged music seemed fitting voice wherewith to commune
with the Supreme; calm was produced by its sound, and by the sight of
many other human creatures offering up prayers and submission with me.
A sentiment approaching happiness followed the total resignation of
one’s being to the guardianship of the world’s ruler. Alas! with the
failing of this solemn strain, the elevated spirit sank again to earth.
Suddenly one of the choristers died—he was lifted from his desk, the
vaults below were hastily opened—he was consigned with a few muttered
prayers to the darksome cavern, abode of thousands who had gone
before—now wide yawning to receive even all who fulfilled the funeral
rites. In vain I would then have turned from this scene, to darkened
aisle or lofty dome, echoing with melodious praise. In the open air
alone I found relief; among nature’s beauteous works, her God reassumed
his attribute of benevolence, and again I could trust that he who built
up the mountains, planted the forests, and poured out the rivers, would
erect another state for lost humanity, where we might awaken again to
our affections, our happiness, and our faith.

Fortunately for me those circumstances were of rare occurrence that
obliged me to visit London, and my duties were confined to the rural
district which our lofty castle overlooked; and here labour stood in
the place of pastime, to occupy such of the country people as were
sufficiently exempt from sorrow or disease. My endeavours were directed
towards urging them to their usual attention to their crops, and to the
acting as if pestilence did not exist. The mower’s scythe was at times
heard; yet the joyless haymakers after they had listlessly turned the
grass, forgot to cart it; the shepherd, when he had sheared his sheep,
would let the wool lie to be scattered by the winds, deeming it useless
to provide clothing for another winter. At times however the spirit of
life was awakened by these employments; the sun, the refreshing breeze,
the sweet smell of the hay, the rustling leaves and prattling rivulets
brought repose to the agitated bosom, and bestowed a feeling akin to
happiness on the apprehensive. Nor, strange to say, was the time
without its pleasures. Young couples, who had loved long and
hopelessly, suddenly found every impediment removed, and wealth pour in
from the death of relatives. The very danger drew them closer. The
immediate peril urged them to seize the immediate opportunity; wildly
and passionately they sought to know what delights existence afforded,
before they yielded to death, and

Snatching their pleasures with rough strife
Thorough the iron gates of life,[13]


they defied the conquering pestilence to destroy what had been, or to
erase even from their death-bed thoughts the sentiment of happiness
which had been theirs.

One instance of this kind came immediately under our notice, where a
high-born girl had in early youth given her heart to one of meaner
extraction. He was a schoolfellow and friend of her brother’s, and
usually spent a part of the holidays at the mansion of the duke her
father. They had played together as children, been the confidants of
each other’s little secrets, mutual aids and consolers in difficulty
and sorrow. Love had crept in, noiseless, terrorless at first, till
each felt their life bound up in the other, and at the same time knew
that they must part. Their extreme youth, and the purity of their
attachment, made them yield with less resistance to the tyranny of
circumstances. The father of the fair Juliet separated them; but not
until the young lover had promised to remain absent only till he had
rendered himself worthy of her, and she had vowed to preserve her
virgin heart, his treasure, till he returned to claim and possess it.

Plague came, threatening to destroy at once the aim of the ambitious
and the hopes of love. Long the Duke of L——derided the idea that there
could be danger while he pursued his plans of cautious seclusion; and
he so far succeeded, that it was not till this second summer, that the
destroyer, at one fell stroke, overthrew his precautions, his security,
and his life. Poor Juliet saw one by one, father, mother, brothers, and
sisters, sicken and die. Most of the servants fled on the first
appearance of disease, those who remained were infected mortally; no
neighbour or rustic ventured within the verge of contagion. By a
strange fatality Juliet alone escaped, and she to the last waited on
her relatives, and smoothed the pillow of death. The moment at length
came, when the last blow was given to the last of the house: the
youthful survivor of her race sat alone among the dead. There was no
living being near to soothe her, or withdraw her from this hideous
company. With the declining heat of a September night, a whirlwind of
storm, thunder, and hail, rattled round the house, and with ghastly
harmony sung the dirge of her family. She sat upon the ground absorbed
in wordless despair, when through the gusty wind and bickering rain she
thought she heard her name called. Whose could that familiar voice be?
Not one of her relations, for they lay glaring on her with stony eyes.
Again her name was syllabled, and she shuddered as she asked herself,
am I becoming mad, or am I dying, that I hear the voices of the
departed? A second thought passed, swift as an arrow, into her brain;
she rushed to the window; and a flash of lightning shewed to her the
expected vision, her lover in the shrubbery beneath; joy lent her
strength to descend the stairs, to open the door, and then she fainted
in his supporting arms.

A thousand times she reproached herself, as with a crime, that she
should revive to happiness with him. The natural clinging of the human
mind to life and joy was in its full energy in her young heart; she
gave herself impetuously up to the enchantment: they were married; and
in their radiant features I saw incarnate, for the last time, the
spirit of love, of rapturous sympathy, which once had been the life of
the world.

I envied them, but felt how impossible it was to imbibe the same
feeling, now that years had multiplied my ties in the world. Above all,
the anxious mother, my own beloved and drooping Idris, claimed my
earnest care; I could not reproach the anxiety that never for a moment
slept in her heart, but I exerted myself to distract her attention from
too keen an observation of the truth of things, of the near and nearer
approaches of disease, misery, and death, of the wild look of our
attendants as intelligence of another and yet another death reached us;
for to the last something new occurred that seemed to transcend in
horror all that had gone before. Wretched beings crawled to die under
our succouring roof; the inhabitants of the Castle decreased daily,
while the survivors huddled together in fear, and, as in a
famine-struck boat, the sport of the wild, interminable waves, each
looked in the other’s face, to guess on whom the death-lot would next
fall. All this I endeavoured to veil, so that it might least impress my
Idris; yet, as I have said, my courage survived even despair: I might
be vanquished, but I would not yield.

One day, it was the ninth of September, seemed devoted to every
disaster, to every harrowing incident. Early in the day, I heard of the
arrival of the aged grandmother of one of our servants at the Castle.
This old woman had reached her hundredth year; her skin was shrivelled,
her form was bent and lost in extreme decrepitude; but as still from
year to year she continued in existence, out-living many younger and
stronger, she began to feel as if she were to live for ever. The plague
came, and the inhabitants of her village died. Clinging, with the
dastard feeling of the aged, to the remnant of her spent life, she had,
on hearing that the pestilence had come into her neighbourhood, barred
her door, and closed her casement, refusing to communicate with any.
She would wander out at night to get food, and returned home, pleased
that she had met no one, that she was in no danger from the plague. As
the earth became more desolate, her difficulty in acquiring sustenance
increased; at first, her son, who lived near, had humoured her by
placing articles of food in her way: at last he died. But, even though
threatened by famine, her fear of the plague was paramount; and her
greatest care was to avoid her fellow creatures. She grew weaker each
day, and each day she had further to go. The night before, she had
reached Datchet; and, prowling about, had found a baker’s shop open and
deserted. Laden with spoil, she hastened to return, and lost her way.
The night was windless, hot, and cloudy; her load became too heavy for
her; and one by one she threw away her loaves, still endeavouring to
get along, though her hobbling fell into lameness, and her weakness at
last into inability to move.

She lay down among the tall corn, and fell asleep. Deep in midnight,
she was awaked by a rustling near her; she would have started up, but
her stiff joints refused to obey her will. A low moan close to her ear
followed, and the rustling increased; she heard a smothered voice
breathe out, Water, Water! several times; and then again a sigh heaved
from the heart of the sufferer. The old woman shuddered, she contrived
at length to sit upright; but her teeth chattered, and her knees
knocked together—close, very close, lay a half-naked figure, just
discernible in the gloom, and the cry for water and the stifled moan
were again uttered. Her motions at length attracted the attention of
her unknown companion; her hand was seized with a convulsive violence
that made the grasp feel like iron, the fingers like the keen teeth of
a trap.—“At last you are come!” were the words given forth—but this
exertion was the last effort of the dying—the joints relaxed, the
figure fell prostrate, one low moan, the last, marked the moment of
death. Morning broke; and the old woman saw the corpse, marked with the
fatal disease, close to her; her wrist was livid with the hold loosened
by death. She felt struck by the plague; her aged frame was unable to
bear her away with sufficient speed; and now, believing herself
infected, she no longer dreaded the association of others; but, as
swiftly as she might, came to her grand-daughter, at Windsor Castle,
there to lament and die. The sight was horrible; still she clung to
life, and lamented her mischance with cries and hideous groans; while
the swift advance of the disease shewed, what proved to be the fact,
that she could not survive many hours.

While I was directing that the necessary care should be taken of her,
Clara came in; she was trembling and pale; and, when I anxiously asked
her the cause of her agitation, she threw herself into my arms weeping
and exclaiming—“Uncle, dearest uncle, do not hate me for ever! I must
tell you, for you must know, that Evelyn, poor little Evelyn”—her voice
was choked by sobs. The fear of so mighty a calamity as the loss of our
adored infant made the current of my blood pause with chilly horror;
but the remembrance of the mother restored my presence of mind. I
sought the little bed of my darling; he was oppressed by fever; but I
trusted, I fondly and fearfully trusted, that there were no symptoms of
the plague. He was not three years old, and his illness appeared only
one of those attacks incident to infancy. I watched him long—his heavy
half-closed lids, his burning cheeks and restless twining of his small
fingers—the fever was violent, the torpor complete—enough, without the
greater fear of pestilence, to awaken alarm. Idris must not see him in
this state. Clara, though only twelve years old, was rendered, through
extreme sensibility, so prudent and careful, that I felt secure in
entrusting the charge of him to her, and it was my task to prevent
Idris from observing their absence. I administered the fitting
remedies, and left my sweet niece to watch beside him, and bring me
notice of any change she should observe.

I then went to Idris, contriving in my way, plausible excuses for
remaining all day in the Castle, and endeavouring to disperse the
traces of care from my brow. Fortunately she was not alone. I found
Merrival, the astronomer, with her. He was far too long sighted in his
view of humanity to heed the casualties of the day, and lived in the
midst of contagion unconscious of its existence. This poor man, learned
as La Place, guileless and unforeseeing as a child, had often been on
the point of starvation, he, his pale wife and numerous offspring,
while he neither felt hunger, nor observed distress. His astronomical
theories absorbed him; calculations were scrawled with coal on the bare
walls of his garret: a hard-earned guinea, or an article of dress, was
exchanged for a book without remorse; he neither heard his children
cry, nor observed his companion’s emaciated form, and the excess of
calamity was merely to him as the occurrence of a cloudy night, when he
would have given his right hand to observe a celestial phenomenon. His
wife was one of those wondrous beings, to be found only among women,
with affections not to be diminished by misfortune. Her mind was
divided between boundless admiration for her husband, and tender
anxiety for her children—she waited on him, worked for them, and never
complained, though care rendered her life one long-drawn, melancholy
dream.

He had introduced himself to Adrian, by a request he made to observe
some planetary motions from his glass. His poverty was easily detected
and relieved. He often thanked us for the books we lent him, and for
the use of our instruments, but never spoke of his altered abode or
change of circumstances. His wife assured us, that he had not observed
any difference, except in the absence of the children from his study,
and to her infinite surprise he complained of this unaccustomed quiet.

He came now to announce to us the completion of his Essay on the
Pericyclical Motions of the Earth’s Axis, and the precession of the
equinoctial points. If an old Roman of the period of the Republic had
returned to life, and talked of the impending election of some
laurel-crowned consul, or of the last battle with Mithridates, his
ideas would not have been more alien to the times, than the
conversation of Merrival. Man, no longer with an appetite for sympathy,
clothed his thoughts in visible signs; nor were there any readers left:
while each one, having thrown away his sword with opposing shield
alone, awaited the plague, Merrival talked of the state of mankind six
thousand years hence. He might with equal interest to us, have added a
commentary, to describe the unknown and unimaginable lineaments of the
creatures, who would then occupy the vacated dwelling of mankind. We
had not the heart to undeceive the poor old man; and at the moment I
came in, he was reading parts of his book to Idris, asking what answer
could be given to this or that position.

Idris could not refrain from a smile, as she listened; she had already
gathered from him that his family was alive and in health; though not
apt to forget the precipice of time on which she stood, yet I could
perceive that she was amused for a moment, by the contrast between the
contracted view we had so long taken of human life, and the seven
league strides with which Merrival paced a coming eternity. I was glad
to see her smile, because it assured me of her total ignorance of her
infant’s danger: but I shuddered to think of the revulsion that would
be occasioned by a discovery of the truth. While Merrival was talking,
Clara softly opened a door behind Idris, and beckoned me to come with a
gesture and look of grief. A mirror betrayed the sign to Idris—she
started up. To suspect evil, to perceive that, Alfred being with us,
the danger must regard her youngest darling, to fly across the long
chambers into his apartment, was the work but of a moment. There she
beheld her Evelyn lying fever-stricken and motionless. I followed her,
and strove to inspire more hope than I could myself entertain; but she
shook her head mournfully. Anguish deprived her of presence of mind;
she gave up to me and Clara the physician’s and nurse’s parts; she sat
by the bed, holding one little burning hand, and, with glazed eyes
fixed on her babe, passed the long day in one unvaried agony. It was
not the plague that visited our little boy so roughly; but she could
not listen to my assurances; apprehension deprived her of judgment and
reflection; every slight convulsion of her child’s features shook her
frame —if he moved, she dreaded the instant crisis; if he remained
still, she saw death in his torpor, and the cloud on her brow darkened.

The poor little thing’s fever encreased towards night. The sensation is
most dreary, to use no stronger term, with which one looks forward to
passing the long hours of night beside a sick bed, especially if the
patient be an infant, who cannot explain its pain, and whose flickering
life resembles the wasting flame of the watch-light,

        Whose narrow fire
Is shaken by the wind, and on whose edge
Devouring darkness hovers.[14]


With eagerness one turns toward the east, with angry impatience one
marks the unchequered darkness; the crowing of a cock, that sound of
glee during day-time, comes wailing and untuneable—the creaking of
rafters, and slight stir of invisible insect is heard and felt as the
signal and type of desolation. Clara, overcome by weariness, had seated
herself at the foot of her cousin’s bed, and in spite of her efforts
slumber weighed down her lids; twice or thrice she shook it off; but at
length she was conquered and slept. Idris sat at the bedside, holding
Evelyn’s hand; we were afraid to speak to each other; I watched the
stars —I hung over my child—I felt his little pulse—I drew near the
mother—again I receded. At the turn of morning a gentle sigh from the
patient attracted me, the burning spot on his cheek faded—his pulse
beat softly and regularly—torpor yielded to sleep. For a long time I
dared not hope; but when his unobstructed breathing and the moisture
that suffused his forehead, were tokens no longer to be mistaken of the
departure of mortal malady, I ventured to whisper the news of the
change to Idris, and at length succeeded in persuading her that I spoke
truth.

But neither this assurance, nor the speedy convalescence of our child
could restore her, even to the portion of peace she before enjoyed. Her
fear had been too deep, too absorbing, too entire, to be changed to
security. She felt as if during her past calm she had dreamed, but was
now awake; she was

        As one
In some lone watch-tower on the deep, awakened
From soothing visions of the home he loves,
Trembling to hear the wrathful billows roar;[15]


as one who has been cradled by a storm, and awakes to find the vessel
sinking. Before, she had been visited by pangs of fear—now, she never
enjoyed an interval of hope. No smile of the heart ever irradiated her
fair countenance; sometimes she forced one, and then gushing tears
would flow, and the sea of grief close above these wrecks of past
happiness. Still while I was near her, she could not be in utter
despair— she fully confided herself to me—she did not seem to fear my
death, or revert to its possibility; to my guardianship she consigned
the full freight of her anxieties, reposing on my love, as a
wind-nipped fawn by the side of a doe, as a wounded nestling under its
mother’s wing, as a tiny, shattered boat, quivering still, beneath some
protecting willow-tree. While I, not proudly as in days of joy, yet
tenderly, and with glad consciousness of the comfort I afforded, drew
my trembling girl close to my heart, and tried to ward every painful
thought or rough circumstance from her sensitive nature.

One other incident occurred at the end of this summer. The Countess of
Windsor, Ex-Queen of England, returned from Germany. She had at the
beginning of the season quitted the vacant city of Vienna; and, unable
to tame her haughty mind to anything like submission, she had delayed
at Hamburgh, and, when at last she came to London, many weeks elapsed
before she gave Adrian notice of her arrival. In spite of her coldness
and long absence, he welcomed her with sensibility, displaying such
affection as sought to heal the wounds of pride and sorrow, and was
repulsed only by her total apparent want of sympathy. Idris heard of
her mother’s return with pleasure. Her own maternal feelings were so
ardent, that she imagined her parent must now, in this waste world,
have lost pride and harshness, and would receive with delight her
filial attentions. The first check to her duteous demonstrations was a
formal intimation from the fallen majesty of England, that I was in no
manner to be intruded upon her. She consented, she said, to forgive her
daughter, and acknowledge her grandchildren; larger concessions must
not be expected.

To me this proceeding appeared (if so light a term may be permitted)
extremely whimsical. Now that the race of man had lost in fact all
distinction of rank, this pride was doubly fatuitous; now that we felt
a kindred, fraternal nature with all who bore the stamp of humanity,
this angry reminiscence of times for ever gone, was worse than foolish.
Idris was too much taken up by her own dreadful fears, to be angry,
hardly grieved; for she judged that insensibility must be the source of
this continued rancour. This was not altogether the fact: but
predominant self-will assumed the arms and masque of callous feeling;
and the haughty lady disdained to exhibit any token of the struggle she
endured; while the slave of pride, she fancied that she sacrificed her
happiness to immutable principle.

False was all this—false all but the affections of our nature, and the
links of sympathy with pleasure or pain. There was but one good and one
evil in the world—life and death. The pomp of rank, the assumption of
power, the possessions of wealth vanished like morning mist. One living
beggar had become of more worth than a national peerage of dead lords—
alas the day!—than of dead heroes, patriots, or men of genius. There
was much of degradation in this: for even vice and virtue had lost
their attributes—life—life—the continuation of our animal mechanism—
was the Alpha and Omega of the desires, the prayers, the prostrate
ambition of human race.

 [10] Calderon de la Barca.


 [11] [2] Wordsworth.


 [12] Keats.


 [13] Andrew Marvell.


 [14] The Cenci


 [15] The Brides’ Tragedy, by T. L. Beddoes, Esq.




CHAPTER IX.


Half England was desolate, when October came, and the equinoctial winds
swept over the earth, chilling the ardours of the unhealthy season. The
summer, which was uncommonly hot, had been protracted into the
beginning of this month, when on the eighteenth a sudden change was
brought about from summer temperature to winter frost. Pestilence then
made a pause in her death-dealing career. Gasping, not daring to name
our hopes, yet full even to the brim with intense expectation, we
stood, as a ship-wrecked sailor stands on a barren rock islanded by the
ocean, watching a distant vessel, fancying that now it nears, and then
again that it is bearing from sight. This promise of a renewed lease of
life turned rugged natures to melting tenderness, and by contrast
filled the soft with harsh and unnatural sentiments. When it seemed
destined that all were to die, we were reckless of the how and when—now
that the virulence of the disease was mitigated, and it appeared
willing to spare some, each was eager to be among the elect, and clung
to life with dastard tenacity. Instances of desertion became more
frequent; and even murders, which made the hearer sick with horror,
where the fear of contagion had armed those nearest in blood against
each other. But these smaller and separate tragedies were about to
yield to a mightier interest—and, while we were promised calm from
infectious influences, a tempest arose wilder than the winds, a tempest
bred by the passions of man, nourished by his most violent impulses,
unexampled and dire.

A number of people from North America, the relics of that populous
continent, had set sail for the East with mad desire of change, leaving
their native plains for lands not less afflicted than their own.
Several hundreds landed in Ireland, about the first of November, and
took possession of such vacant habitations as they could find; seizing
upon the superabundant food, and the stray cattle. As they exhausted
the produce of one spot, they went on to another. At length they began
to interfere with the inhabitants, and strong in their concentrated
numbers, ejected the natives from their dwellings, and robbed them of
their winter store. A few events of this kind roused the fiery nature
of the Irish; and they attacked the invaders. Some were destroyed; the
major part escaped by quick and well ordered movements; and danger made
them careful. Their numbers ably arranged; the very deaths among them
concealed; moving on in good order, and apparently given up to
enjoyment, they excited the envy of the Irish. The Americans permitted
a few to join their band, and presently the recruits outnumbered the
strangers—nor did they join with them, nor imitate the admirable order
which, preserved by the Trans-Atlantic chiefs, rendered them at once
secure and formidable. The Irish followed their track in disorganized
multitudes; each day encreasing; each day becoming more lawless. The
Americans were eager to escape from the spirit they had roused, and,
reaching the eastern shores of the island, embarked for England. Their
incursion would hardly have been felt had they come alone; but the
Irish, collected in unnatural numbers, began to feel the inroads of
famine, and they followed in the wake of the Americans for England
also. The crossing of the sea could not arrest their progress. The
harbours of the desolate sea-ports of the west of Ireland were filled
with vessels of all sizes, from the man of war to the small fishers’
boat, which lay sailorless, and rotting on the lazy deep. The emigrants
embarked by hundreds, and unfurling their sails with rude hands, made
strange havoc of buoy and cordage. Those who modestly betook themselves
to the smaller craft, for the most part achieved their watery journey
in safety. Some, in the true spirit of reckless enterprise, went on
board a ship of an hundred and twenty guns; the vast hull drifted with
the tide out of the bay, and after many hours its crew of landsmen
contrived to spread a great part of her enormous canvass—the wind took
it, and while a thousand mistakes of the helmsman made her present her
head now to one point, and now to another, the vast fields of canvass
that formed her sails flapped with a sound like that of a huge
cataract; or such as a sea-like forest may give forth when buffeted by
an equinoctial north-wind. The port-holes were open, and with every
sea, which as she lurched, washed her decks, they received whole tons
of water. The difficulties were increased by a fresh breeze which began
to blow, whistling among the shrowds, dashing the sails this way and
that, and rending them with horrid split, and such whir as may have
visited the dreams of Milton, when he imagined the winnowing of the
arch-fiend’s van-like wings, which encreased the uproar of wild chaos.
These sounds were mingled with the roaring of the sea, the splash of
the chafed billows round the vessel’s sides, and the gurgling up of the
water in the hold. The crew, many of whom had never seen the sea
before, felt indeed as if heaven and earth came ruining together, as
the vessel dipped her bows in the waves, or rose high upon them. Their
yells were drowned in the clamour of elements, and the thunder rivings
of their unwieldy habitation—they discovered at last that the water
gained on them, and they betook themselves to their pumps; they might
as well have laboured to empty the ocean by bucketfuls. As the sun went
down, the gale encreased; the ship seemed to feel her danger, she was
now completely water-logged, and presented other indications of
settling before she went down. The bay was crowded with vessels, whose
crews, for the most part, were observing the uncouth sportings of this
huge unwieldy machine—they saw her gradually sink; the waters now
rising above her lower decks—they could hardly wink before she had
utterly disappeared, nor could the place where the sea had closed over
her be at all discerned. Some few of her crew were saved, but the
greater part clinging to her cordage and masts went down with her, to
rise only when death loosened their hold.

This event caused many of those who were about to sail, to put foot
again on firm land, ready to encounter any evil rather than to rush
into the yawning jaws of the pitiless ocean. But these were few, in
comparison to the numbers who actually crossed. Many went up as high as
Belfast to ensure a shorter passage, and then journeying south through
Scotland, they were joined by the poorer natives of that country, and
all poured with one consent into England.

Such incursions struck the English with affright, in all those towns
where there was still sufficient population to feel the change. There
was room enough indeed in our hapless country for twice the number of
invaders; but their lawless spirit instigated them to violence; they
took a delight in thrusting the possessors from their houses; in
seizing on some mansion of luxury, where the noble dwellers secluded
themselves in fear of the plague; in forcing these of either sex to
become their servants and purveyors; till, the ruin complete in one
place, they removed their locust visitation to another. When unopposed
they spread their ravages wide; in cases of danger they clustered, and
by dint of numbers overthrew their weak and despairing foes. They came
from the east and the north, and directed their course without apparent
motive, but unanimously towards our unhappy metropolis.

Communication had been to a great degree cut off through the paralyzing
effects of pestilence, so that the van of our invaders had proceeded as
far as Manchester and Derby, before we received notice of their
arrival. They swept the country like a conquering army, burning—laying
waste— murdering. The lower and vagabond English joined with them. Some
few of the Lords Lieutenant who remained, endeavoured to collect the
militia—but the ranks were vacant, panic seized on all, and the
opposition that was made only served to increase the audacity and
cruelty of the enemy. They talked of taking London, conquering
England—calling to mind the long detail of injuries which had for many
years been forgotten. Such vaunts displayed their weakness, rather than
their strength—yet still they might do extreme mischief, which, ending
in their destruction, would render them at last objects of compassion
and remorse.

We were now taught how, in the beginning of the world, mankind clothed
their enemies in impossible attributes—and how details proceeding from
mouth to mouth, might, like Virgil’s ever-growing Rumour, reach the
heavens with her brow, and clasp Hesperus and Lucifer with her
outstretched hands. Gorgon and Centaur, dragon and iron-hoofed lion,
vast sea-monster and gigantic hydra, were but types of the strange and
appalling accounts brought to London concerning our invaders. Their
landing was long unknown, but having now advanced within an hundred
miles of London, the country people flying before them arrived in
successive troops, each exaggerating the numbers, fury, and cruelty of
the assailants. Tumult filled the before quiet streets—women and
children deserted their homes, escaping they knew not whither—fathers,
husbands, and sons, stood trembling, not for themselves, but for their
loved and defenceless relations. As the country people poured into
London, the citizens fled southwards—they climbed the higher edifices
of the town, fancying that they could discern the smoke and flames the
enemy spread around them. As Windsor lay, to a great degree, in the
line of march from the west, I removed my family to London, assigning
the Tower for their sojourn, and joining Adrian, acted as his
Lieutenant in the coming struggle.

We employed only two days in our preparations, and made good use of
them. Artillery and arms were collected; the remnants of such
regiments, as could be brought through many losses into any show of
muster, were put under arms, with that appearance of military
discipline which might encourage our own party, and seem most
formidable to the disorganized multitude of our enemies. Even music was
not wanting: banners floated in the air, and the shrill fife and loud
trumpet breathed forth sounds of encouragement and victory. A practised
ear might trace an undue faltering in the step of the soldiers; but
this was not occasioned so much by fear of the adversary, as by
disease, by sorrow, and by fatal prognostications, which often weighed
most potently on the brave, and quelled the manly heart to abject
subjection.

Adrian led the troops. He was full of care. It was small relief to him
that our discipline should gain us success in such a conflict; while
plague still hovered to equalize the conqueror and the conquered, it
was not victory that he desired, but bloodless peace. As we advanced,
we were met by bands of peasantry, whose almost naked condition, whose
despair and horror, told at once the fierce nature of the coming enemy.
The senseless spirit of conquest and thirst of spoil blinded them,
while with insane fury they deluged the country in ruin. The sight of
the military restored hope to those who fled, and revenge took place of
fear. They inspired the soldiers with the same sentiment. Languor was
changed to ardour, the slow step converted to a speedy pace, while the
hollow murmur of the multitude, inspired by one feeling, and that
deadly, filled the air, drowning the clang of arms and sound of music.
Adrian perceived the change, and feared that it would be difficult to
prevent them from wreaking their utmost fury on the Irish. He rode
through the lines, charging the officers to restrain the troops,
exhorting the soldiers, restoring order, and quieting in some degree
the violent agitation that swelled every bosom.

We first came upon a few stragglers of the Irish at St. Albans. They
retreated, and, joining others of their companions, still fell back,
till they reached the main body. Tidings of an armed and regular
opposition recalled them to a sort of order. They made Buckingham their
head-quarters, and scouts were sent out to ascertain our situation. We
remained for the night at Luton. In the morning a simultaneous movement
caused us each to advance. It was early dawn, and the air, impregnated
with freshest odour, seemed in idle mockery to play with our banners,
and bore onwards towards the enemy the music of the bands, the
neighings of the horses, and regular step of the infantry. The first
sound of martial instruments that came upon our undisciplined foe,
inspired surprise, not unmingled with dread. It spoke of other days, of
days of concord and order; it was associated with times when plague was
not, and man lived beyond the shadow of imminent fate. The pause was
momentary. Soon we heard their disorderly clamour, the barbarian
shouts, the untimed step of thousands coming on in disarray. Their
troops now came pouring on us from the open country or narrow lanes; a
large extent of unenclosed fields lay between us; we advanced to the
middle of this, and then made a halt: being somewhat on superior
ground, we could discern the space they covered. When their leaders
perceived us drawn out in opposition, they also gave the word to halt,
and endeavoured to form their men into some imitation of military
discipline. The first ranks had muskets; some were mounted, but their
arms were such as they had seized during their advance, their horses
those they had taken from the peasantry; there was no uniformity, and
little obedience, but their shouts and wild gestures showed the untamed
spirit that inspired them. Our soldiers received the word, and advanced
to quickest time, but in perfect order: their uniform dresses, the
gleam of their polished arms, their silence, and looks of sullen hate,
were more appalling than the savage clamour of our innumerous foe. Thus
coming nearer and nearer each other, the howls and shouts of the Irish
increased; the English proceeded in obedience to their officers, until
they came near enough to distinguish the faces of their enemies; the
sight inspired them with fury: with one cry, that rent heaven and was
re-echoed by the furthest lines, they rushed on; they disdained the use
of the bullet, but with fixed bayonet dashed among the opposing foe,
while the ranks opening at intervals, the matchmen lighted the cannon,
whose deafening roar and blinding smoke filled up the horror of the
scene. I was beside Adrian; a moment before he had again given the word
to halt, and had remained a few yards distant from us in deep
meditation: he was forming swiftly his plan of action, to prevent the
effusion of blood; the noise of cannon, the sudden rush of the troops,
and yell of the foe, startled him: with flashing eyes he exclaimed,
“Not one of these must perish!” and plunging the rowels into his
horse’s sides, he dashed between the conflicting bands. We, his staff,
followed him to surround and protect him; obeying his signal, however,
we fell back somewhat. The soldiery perceiving him, paused in their
onset; he did not swerve from the bullets that passed near him, but
rode immediately between the opposing lines. Silence succeeded to
clamour; about fifty men lay on the ground dying or dead. Adrian raised
his sword in act to speak: “By whose command,” he cried, addressing his
own troops, “do you advance? Who ordered your attack? Fall back; these
misguided men shall not be slaughtered, while I am your general. Sheath
your weapons; these are your brothers, commit not fratricide; soon the
plague will not leave one for you to glut your revenge upon: will you
be more pitiless than pestilence? As you honour me—as you worship God,
in whose image those also are created—as your children and friends are
dear to you,—shed not a drop of precious human blood.”

He spoke with outstretched hand and winning voice, and then turning to
our invaders, with a severe brow, he commanded them to lay down their
arms: “Do you think,” he said, “that because we are wasted by plague,
you can overcome us; the plague is also among you, and when ye are
vanquished by famine and disease, the ghosts of those you have murdered
will arise to bid you not hope in death. Lay down your arms, barbarous
and cruel men—men whose hands are stained with the blood of the
innocent, whose souls are weighed down by the orphan’s cry! We shall
conquer, for the right is on our side; already your cheeks are pale—the
weapons fall from your nerveless grasp. Lay down your arms, fellow men!
brethren! Pardon, succour, and brotherly love await your repentance.
You are dear to us, because you wear the frail shape of humanity; each
one among you will find a friend and host among these forces. Shall man
be the enemy of man, while plague, the foe to all, even now is above
us, triumphing in our butchery, more cruel than her own?”

Each army paused. On our side the soldiers grasped their arms firmly,
and looked with stern glances on the foe. These had not thrown down
their weapons, more from fear than the spirit of contest; they looked
at each other, each wishing to follow some example given him,—but they
had no leader. Adrian threw himself from his horse, and approaching one
of those just slain: “He was a man,” he cried, “and he is dead. O
quickly bind up the wounds of the fallen—let not one die; let not one
more soul escape through your merciless gashes, to relate before the
throne of God the tale of fratricide; bind up their wounds—restore them
to their friends. Cast away the hearts of tigers that burn in your
breasts; throw down those tools of cruelty and hate; in this pause of
exterminating destiny, let each man be brother, guardian, and stay to
the other. Away with those blood-stained arms, and hasten some of you
to bind up these wounds.”

As he spoke, he knelt on the ground, and raised in his arms a man from
whose side the warm tide of life gushed—the poor wretch gasped—so still
had either host become, that his moans were distinctly heard, and every
heart, late fiercely bent on universal massacre, now beat anxiously in
hope and fear for the fate of this one man. Adrian tore off his
military scarf and bound it round the sufferer—it was too late—the man
heaved a deep sigh, his head fell back, his limbs lost their sustaining
power.— “He is dead!” said Adrian, as the corpse fell from his arms on
the ground, and he bowed his head in sorrow and awe. The fate of the
world seemed bound up in the death of this single man. On either side
the bands threw down their arms, even the veterans wept, and our party
held out their hands to their foes, while a gush of love and deepest
amity filled every heart. The two forces mingling, unarmed and hand in
hand, talking only how each might assist the other, the adversaries
conjoined; each repenting, the one side their former cruelties, the
other their late violence, they obeyed the orders of the General to
proceed towards London.

Adrian was obliged to exert his utmost prudence, first to allay the
discord, and then to provide for the multitude of the invaders. They
were marched to various parts of the southern counties, quartered in
deserted villages,—a part were sent back to their own island, while the
season of winter so far revived our energy, that the passes of the
country were defended, and any increase of numbers prohibited.

On this occasion Adrian and Idris met after a separation of nearly a
year. Adrian had been occupied in fulfilling a laborious and painful
task. He had been familiar with every species of human misery, and had
for ever found his powers inadequate, his aid of small avail. Yet the
purpose of his soul, his energy and ardent resolution, prevented any
re-action of sorrow. He seemed born anew, and virtue, more potent than
Medean alchemy, endued him with health and strength. Idris hardly
recognized the fragile being, whose form had seemed to bend even to the
summer breeze, in the energetic man, whose very excess of sensibility
rendered him more capable of fulfilling his station of pilot in
storm-tossed England.

It was not thus with Idris. She was uncomplaining; but the very soul of
fear had taken its seat in her heart. She had grown thin and pale, her
eyes filled with involuntary tears, her voice was broken and low. She
tried to throw a veil over the change which she knew her brother must
observe in her, but the effort was ineffectual; and when alone with
him, with a burst of irrepressible grief she gave vent to her
apprehensions and sorrow. She described in vivid terms the ceaseless
care that with still renewing hunger ate into her soul; she compared
this gnawing of sleepless expectation of evil, to the vulture that fed
on the heart of Prometheus; under the influence of this eternal
excitement, and of the interminable struggles she endured to combat and
conceal it, she felt, she said, as if all the wheels and springs of the
animal machine worked at double rate, and were fast consuming
themselves. Sleep was not sleep, for her waking thoughts, bridled by
some remains of reason, and by the sight of her children happy and in
health, were then transformed to wild dreams, all her terrors were
realized, all her fears received their dread fulfilment. To this state
there was no hope, no alleviation, unless the grave should quickly
receive its destined prey, and she be permitted to die, before she
experienced a thousand living deaths in the loss of those she loved.
Fearing to give me pain, she hid as best she could the excess of her
wretchedness, but meeting thus her brother after a long absence, she
could not restrain the expression of her woe, but with all the
vividness of imagination with which misery is always replete, she
poured out the emotions of her heart to her beloved and sympathizing
Adrian.

Her present visit to London tended to augment her state of inquietude,
by shewing in its utmost extent the ravages occasioned by pestilence.
It hardly preserved the appearance of an inhabited city; grass sprung
up thick in the streets; the squares were weed-grown, the houses were
shut up, while silence and loneliness characterized the busiest parts
of the town. Yet in the midst of desolation Adrian had preserved order;
and each one continued to live according to law and custom—human
institutions thus surviving as it were divine ones, and while the
decree of population was abrogated, property continued sacred. It was a
melancholy reflection; and in spite of the diminution of evil produced,
it struck on the heart as a wretched mockery. All idea of resort for
pleasure, of theatres and festivals had passed away. “Next summer,”
said Adrian as we parted on our return to Windsor, “will decide the
fate of the human race. I shall not pause in my exertions until that
time; but, if plague revives with the coming year, all contest with her
must cease, and our only occupation be the choice of a grave.”

I must not forget one incident that occurred during this visit to
London. The visits of Merrival to Windsor, before frequent, had
suddenly ceased. At this time where but a hair’s line separated the
living from the dead, I feared that our friend had become a victim to
the all-embracing evil. On this occasion I went, dreading the worst, to
his dwelling, to see if I could be of any service to those of his
family who might have survived. The house was deserted, and had been
one of those assigned to the invading strangers quartered in London. I
saw his astronomical instruments put to strange uses, his globes
defaced, his papers covered with abstruse calculations destroyed. The
neighbours could tell me little, till I lighted on a poor woman who
acted as nurse in these perilous times. She told me that all the family
were dead, except Merrival himself, who had gone mad— mad, she called
it, yet on questioning her further, it appeared that he was possessed
only by the delirium of excessive grief. This old man, tottering on the
edge of the grave, and prolonging his prospect through millions of
calculated years,—this visionary who had not seen starvation in the
wasted forms of his wife and children, or plague in the horrible sights
and sounds that surrounded him—this astronomer, apparently dead on
earth, and living only in the motion of the spheres—loved his family
with unapparent but intense affection. Through long habit they had
become a part of himself; his want of worldly knowledge, his absence of
mind and infant guilelessness, made him utterly dependent on them. It
was not till one of them died that he perceived their danger; one by
one they were carried off by pestilence; and his wife, his helpmate and
supporter, more necessary to him than his own limbs and frame, which
had hardly been taught the lesson of self-preservation, the kind
companion whose voice always spoke peace to him, closed her eyes in
death. The old man felt the system of universal nature which he had so
long studied and adored, slide from under him, and he stood among the
dead, and lifted his voice in curses.—No wonder that the attendant
should interpret as phrensy the harrowing maledictions of the
grief-struck old man.

I had commenced my search late in the day, a November day, that closed
in early with pattering rain and melancholy wind. As I turned from the
door, I saw Merrival, or rather the shadow of Merrival, attenuated and
wild, pass me, and sit on the steps of his home. The breeze scattered
the grey locks on his temples, the rain drenched his uncovered head, he
sat hiding his face in his withered hands. I pressed his shoulder to
awaken his attention, but he did not alter his position. “Merrival,” I
said, “it is long since we have seen you—you must return to Windsor
with me—Lady Idris desires to see you, you will not refuse her
request—come home with me.”

He replied in a hollow voice, “Why deceive a helpless old man, why talk
hypocritically to one half crazed? Windsor is not my home; my true home
I have found; the home that the Creator has prepared for me.”

His accent of bitter scorn thrilled me—“Do not tempt me to speak,” he
continued, “my words would scare you—in an universe of cowards I dare
think—among the church-yard tombs—among the victims of His merciless
tyranny I dare reproach the Supreme Evil. How can he punish me? Let him
bare his arm and transfix me with lightning—this is also one of his
attributes”—and the old man laughed.

He rose, and I followed him through the rain to a neighbouring
church-yard —he threw himself on the wet earth. “Here they are,” he
cried, “beautiful creatures—breathing, speaking, loving creatures. She
who by day and night cherished the age-worn lover of her youth—they,
parts of my flesh, my children—here they are: call them, scream their
names through the night; they will not answer!” He clung to the little
heaps that marked the graves. “I ask but one thing; I do not fear His
hell, for I have it here; I do not desire His heaven, let me but die
and be laid beside them; let me but, when I lie dead, feel my flesh as
it moulders, mingle with theirs. Promise,” and he raised himself
painfully, and seized my arm, “promise to bury me with them.”

“So God help me and mine as I promise,” I replied, “on one condition:
return with me to Windsor.”

“To Windsor!” he cried with a shriek, “Never!—from this place I never
go —my bones, my flesh, I myself, are already buried here, and what you
see of me is corrupted clay like them. I will lie here, and cling here,
till rain, and hail, and lightning and storm, ruining on me, make me
one in substance with them below.”

In a few words I must conclude this tragedy. I was obliged to leave
London, and Adrian undertook to watch over him; the task was soon
fulfilled; age, grief, and inclement weather, all united to hush his
sorrows, and bring repose to his heart, whose beats were agony. He died
embracing the sod, which was piled above his breast, when he was placed
beside the beings whom he regretted with such wild despair.

I returned to Windsor at the wish of Idris, who seemed to think that
there was greater safety for her children at that spot; and because,
once having taken on me the guardianship of the district, I would not
desert it while an inhabitant survived. I went also to act in
conformity with Adrian’s plans, which was to congregate in masses what
remained of the population; for he possessed the conviction that it was
only through the benevolent and social virtues that any safety was to
be hoped for the remnant of mankind.

It was a melancholy thing to return to this spot so dear to us, as the
scene of a happiness rarely before enjoyed, here to mark the extinction
of our species, and trace the deep uneraseable footsteps of disease
over the fertile and cherished soil. The aspect of the country had so
far changed, that it had been impossible to enter on the task of sowing
seed, and other autumnal labours. That season was now gone; and winter
had set in with sudden and unusual severity. Alternate frosts and thaws
succeeding to floods, rendered the country impassable. Heavy falls of
snow gave an arctic appearance to the scenery; the roofs of the houses
peeped from the white mass; the lowly cot and stately mansion, alike
deserted, were blocked up, their thresholds uncleared; the windows were
broken by the hail, while the prevalence of a north-east wind rendered
out-door exertions extremely painful. The altered state of society made
these accidents of nature, sources of real misery. The luxury of
command and the attentions of servitude were lost. It is true that the
necessaries of life were assembled in such quantities, as to supply to
superfluity the wants of the diminished population; but still much
labour was required to arrange these, as it were, raw materials; and
depressed by sickness, and fearful of the future, we had not energy to
enter boldly and decidedly on any system.

I can speak for myself—want of energy was not my failing. The intense
life that quickened my pulses, and animated my frame, had the effect,
not of drawing me into the mazes of active life, but of exalting my
lowliness, and of bestowing majestic proportions on insignificant
objects—I could have lived the life of a peasant in the same way—my
trifling occupations were swelled into important pursuits; my
affections were impetuous and engrossing passions, and nature with all
her changes was invested in divine attributes. The very spirit of the
Greek mythology inhabited my heart; I deified the uplands, glades, and
streams, I

Had sight of Proteus coming from the sea;
And heard old Triton blow his wreathed horn.[16]


Strange, that while the earth preserved her monotonous course, I dwelt
with ever-renewing wonder on her antique laws, and now that with
excentric wheel she rushed into an untried path, I should feel this
spirit fade; I struggled with despondency and weariness, but like a
fog, they choked me. Perhaps, after the labours and stupendous
excitement of the past summer, the calm of winter and the almost menial
toils it brought with it, were by natural re-action doubly irksome. It
was not the grasping passion of the preceding year, which gave life and
individuality to each moment—it was not the aching pangs induced by the
distresses of the times. The utter inutility that had attended all my
exertions took from them their usual effects of exhilaration, and
despair rendered abortive the balm of self applause—I longed to return
to my old occupations, but of what use were they? To read were
futile—to write, vanity indeed. The earth, late wide circus for the
display of dignified exploits, vast theatre for a magnificent drama,
now presented a vacant space, an empty stage—for actor or spectator
there was no longer aught to say or hear.

Our little town of Windsor, in which the survivors from the
neighbouring counties were chiefly assembled, wore a melancholy aspect.
Its streets were blocked up with snow—the few passengers seemed
palsied, and frozen by the ungenial visitation of winter. To escape
these evils was the aim and scope of all our exertions. Families late
devoted to exalting and refined pursuits, rich, blooming, and young,
with diminished numbers and care-fraught hearts, huddled over a fire,
grown selfish and grovelling through suffering. Without the aid of
servants, it was necessary to discharge all household duties; hands
unused to such labour must knead the bread, or in the absence of flour,
the statesmen or perfumed courtier must undertake the butcher’s office.
Poor and rich were now equal, or rather the poor were the superior,
since they entered on such tasks with alacrity and experience; while
ignorance, inaptitude, and habits of repose, rendered them fatiguing to
the luxurious, galling to the proud, disgustful to all whose minds,
bent on intellectual improvement, held it their dearest privilege to be
exempt from attending to mere animal wants.

But in every change goodness and affection can find field for exertion
and display. Among some these changes produced a devotion and sacrifice
of self at once graceful and heroic. It was a sight for the lovers of
the human race to enjoy; to behold, as in ancient times, the
patriarchal modes in which the variety of kindred and friendship
fulfilled their duteous and kindly offices. Youths, nobles of the land,
performed for the sake of mother or sister, the services of menials
with amiable cheerfulness. They went to the river to break the ice, and
draw water: they assembled on foraging expeditions, or axe in hand
felled the trees for fuel. The females received them on their return
with the simple and affectionate welcome known before only to the lowly
cottage—a clean hearth and bright fire; the supper ready cooked by
beloved hands; gratitude for the provision for to-morrow’s meal:
strange enjoyments for the high-born English, yet they were now their
sole, hard earned, and dearly prized luxuries.

None was more conspicuous for this graceful submission to
circumstances, noble humility, and ingenious fancy to adorn such acts
with romantic colouring, than our own Clara. She saw my despondency,
and the aching cares of Idris. Her perpetual study was to relieve us
from labour and to spread ease and even elegance over our altered mode
of life. We still had some attendants spared by disease, and warmly
attached to us. But Clara was jealous of their services; she would be
sole handmaid of Idris, sole minister to the wants of her little
cousins; nothing gave her so much pleasure as our employing her in this
way; she went beyond our desires, earnest, diligent, and unwearied,—

Abra was ready ere we called her name,
And though we called another, Abra came.[17]


It was my task each day to visit the various families assembled in our
town, and when the weather permitted, I was glad to prolong my ride,
and to muse in solitude over every changeful appearance of our destiny,
endeavouring to gather lessons for the future from the experience of
the past. The impatience with which, while in society, the ills that
afflicted my species inspired me, were softened by loneliness, when
individual suffering was merged in the general calamity, strange to
say, less afflicting to contemplate. Thus often, pushing my way with
difficulty through the narrow snow-blocked town, I crossed the bridge
and passed through Eton. No youthful congregation of gallant-hearted
boys thronged the portal of the college; sad silence pervaded the busy
school-room and noisy playground. I extended my ride towards Salt Hill,
on every side impeded by the snow. Were those the fertile fields I
loved—was that the interchange of gentle upland and cultivated dale,
once covered with waving corn, diversified by stately trees, watered by
the meandering Thames? One sheet of white covered it, while bitter
recollection told me that cold as the winter-clothed earth, were the
hearts of the inhabitants. I met troops of horses, herds of cattle,
flocks of sheep, wandering at will; here throwing down a hay-rick, and
nestling from cold in its heart, which afforded them shelter and
food—there having taken possession of a vacant cottage. Once on a
frosty day, pushed on by restless unsatisfying reflections, I sought a
favourite haunt, a little wood not far distant from Salt Hill. A
bubbling spring prattles over stones on one side, and a plantation of a
few elms and beeches, hardly deserve, and yet continue the name of
wood. This spot had for me peculiar charms. It had been a favourite
resort of Adrian; it was secluded; and he often said that in boyhood,
his happiest hours were spent here; having escaped the stately bondage
of his mother, he sat on the rough hewn steps that led to the spring,
now reading a favourite book, now musing, with speculation beyond his
years, on the still unravelled skein of morals or metaphysics. A
melancholy foreboding assured me that I should never see this place
more; so with careful thought, I noted each tree, every winding of the
streamlet and irregularity of the soil, that I might better call up its
idea in absence. A robin red-breast dropt from the frosty branches of
the trees, upon the congealed rivulet; its panting breast and
half-closed eyes shewed that it was dying: a hawk appeared in the air;
sudden fear seized the little creature; it exerted its last strength,
throwing itself on its back, raising its talons in impotent defence
against its powerful enemy. I took it up and placed it in my breast. I
fed it with a few crumbs from a biscuit; by degrees it revived; its
warm fluttering heart beat against me; I cannot tell why I detail this
trifling incident—but the scene is still before me; the snow-clad
fields seen through the silvered trunks of the beeches,—the brook, in
days of happiness alive with sparkling waters, now choked by ice—the
leafless trees fantastically dressed in hoar frost—the shapes of summer
leaves imaged by winter’s frozen hand on the hard ground—the dusky sky,
drear cold, and unbroken silence—while close in my bosom, my feathered
nursling lay warm, and safe, speaking its content with a light chirp—
painful reflections thronged, stirring my brain with wild
commotion—cold and death-like as the snowy fields was all
earth—misery-stricken the life-tide of the inhabitants—why should I
oppose the cataract of destruction that swept us away?—why string my
nerves and renew my wearied efforts—ah, why? But that my firm courage
and cheerful exertions might shelter the dear mate, whom I chose in the
spring of my life; though the throbbings of my heart be replete with
pain, though my hopes for the future are chill, still while your dear
head, my gentlest love, can repose in peace on that heart, and while
you derive from its fostering care, comfort, and hope, my struggles
shall not cease,—I will not call myself altogether vanquished.

One fine February day, when the sun had reassumed some of its genial
power, I walked in the forest with my family. It was one of those
lovely winter-days which assert the capacity of nature to bestow beauty
on barrenness. The leafless trees spread their fibrous branches against
the pure sky; their intricate and pervious tracery resembled delicate
sea-weed; the deer were turning up the snow in search of the hidden
grass; the white was made intensely dazzling by the sun, and trunks of
the trees, rendered more conspicuous by the loss of preponderating
foliage, gathered around like the labyrinthine columns of a vast
temple; it was impossible not to receive pleasure from the sight of
these things. Our children, freed from the bondage of winter, bounded
before us; pursuing the deer, or rousing the pheasants and partridges
from their coverts. Idris leant on my arm; her sadness yielded to the
present sense of pleasure. We met other families on the Long Walk,
enjoying like ourselves the return of the genial season. At once, I
seemed to awake; I cast off the clinging sloth of the past months;
earth assumed a new appearance, and my view of the future was suddenly
made clear. I exclaimed, “I have now found out the secret!”

“What secret?”

In answer to this question, I described our gloomy winter-life, our
sordid cares, our menial labours:—“This northern country,” I said, “is
no place for our diminished race. When mankind were few, it was not
here that they battled with the powerful agents of nature, and were
enabled to cover the globe with offspring. We must seek some natural
Paradise, some garden of the earth, where our simple wants may be
easily supplied, and the enjoyment of a delicious climate compensate
for the social pleasures we have lost. If we survive this coming
summer, I will not spend the ensuing winter in England; neither I nor
any of us.”

I spoke without much heed, and the very conclusion of what I said
brought with it other thoughts. Should we, any of us, survive the
coming summer? I saw the brow of Idris clouded; I again felt, that we
were enchained to the car of fate, over whose coursers we had no
control. We could no longer say, This we will do, and this we will
leave undone. A mightier power than the human was at hand to destroy
our plans or to achieve the work we avoided. It were madness to
calculate upon another winter. This was our last. The coming summer was
the extreme end of our vista; and, when we arrived there, instead of a
continuation of the long road, a gulph yawned, into which we must of
force be precipitated. The last blessing of humanity was wrested from
us; we might no longer hope. Can the madman, as he clanks his chains,
hope? Can the wretch, led to the scaffold, who when he lays his head on
the block, marks the double shadow of himself and the executioner,
whose uplifted arm bears the axe, hope? Can the ship-wrecked mariner,
who spent with swimming, hears close behind the splashing waters
divided by a shark which pursues him through the Atlantic, hope? Such
hope as theirs, we also may entertain!

Old fable tells us, that this gentle spirit sprung from the box of
Pandora, else crammed with evils; but these were unseen and null, while
all admired the inspiriting loveliness of young Hope; each man’s heart
became her home; she was enthroned sovereign of our lives, here and
here-after; she was deified and worshipped, declared incorruptible and
everlasting. But like all other gifts of the Creator to Man, she is
mortal; her life has attained its last hour. We have watched over her;
nursed her flickering existence; now she has fallen at once from youth
to decrepitude, from health to immedicinable disease; even as we spend
ourselves in struggles for her recovery, she dies; to all nations the
voice goes forth, Hope is dead! We are but mourners in the funeral
train, and what immortal essence or perishable creation will refuse to
make one in the sad procession that attends to its grave the dead
comforter of humanity?

Does not the sun call in his light? and day
Like a thin exhalation melt away—
Both wrapping up their beams in clouds to be
Themselves close mourners at this obsequie.[18]


 [16] Wordsworth.


 [17] Prior’s “Solomon.”


 [18] Cleveland’s Poems.




VOL. III.




CHAPTER I.


Hear you not the rushing sound of the coming tempest? Do you not behold
the clouds open, and destruction lurid and dire pour down on the
blasted earth? See you not the thunderbolt fall, and are deafened by
the shout of heaven that follows its descent? Feel you not the earth
quake and open with agonizing groans, while the air is pregnant with
shrieks and wailings,— all announcing the last days of man? No! none of
these things accompanied our fall! The balmy air of spring, breathed
from nature’s ambrosial home, invested the lovely earth, which wakened
as a young mother about to lead forth in pride her beauteous offspring
to meet their sire who had been long absent. The buds decked the trees,
the flowers adorned the land: the dark branches, swollen with
seasonable juices, expanded into leaves, and the variegated foliage of
spring, bending and singing in the breeze, rejoiced in the genial
warmth of the unclouded empyrean: the brooks flowed murmuring, the sea
was waveless, and the promontories that over-hung it were reflected in
the placid waters; birds awoke in the woods, while abundant food for
man and beast sprung up from the dark ground. Where was pain and evil?
Not in the calm air or weltering ocean; not in the woods or fertile
fields, nor among the birds that made the woods resonant with song, nor
the animals that in the midst of plenty basked in the sunshine. Our
enemy, like the Calamity of Homer, trod our hearts, and no sound was
echoed from her steps—

With ills the land is rife, with ills the sea,
Diseases haunt our frail humanity,
Through noon, through night, on casual wing they glide,
Silent,—a voice the power all-wise denied.[19]


Once man was a favourite of the Creator, as the royal psalmist sang,
“God had made him a little lower than the angels, and had crowned him
with glory and honour. God made him to have dominion over the works of
his hands, and put all things under his feet.” Once it was so; now is
man lord of the creation? Look at him—ha! I see plague! She has
invested his form, is incarnate in his flesh, has entwined herself with
his being, and blinds his heaven-seeking eyes. Lie down, O man, on the
flower-strown earth; give up all claim to your inheritance, all you can
ever possess of it is the small cell which the dead require. Plague is
the companion of spring, of sunshine, and plenty. We no longer struggle
with her. We have forgotten what we did when she was not. Of old navies
used to stem the giant ocean-waves betwixt Indus and the Pole for
slight articles of luxury. Men made perilous journies to possess
themselves of earth’s splendid trifles, gems and gold. Human labour was
wasted—human life set at nought. Now life is all that we covet; that
this automaton of flesh should, with joints and springs in order,
perform its functions, that this dwelling of the soul should be capable
of containing its dweller. Our minds, late spread abroad through
countless spheres and endless combinations of thought, now retrenched
themselves behind this wall of flesh, eager to preserve its well-being
only. We were surely sufficiently degraded.

At first the increase of sickness in spring brought increase of toil to
such of us, who, as yet spared to life, bestowed our time and thoughts
on our fellow creatures. We nerved ourselves to the task: “in the midst
of despair we performed the tasks of hope.” We went out with the
resolution of disputing with our foe. We aided the sick, and comforted
the sorrowing; turning from the multitudinous dead to the rare
survivors, with an energy of desire that bore the resemblance of power,
we bade them—live. Plague sat paramount the while, and laughed us to
scorn.

Have any of you, my readers, observed the ruins of an anthill
immediately after its destruction? At first it appears entirely
deserted of its former inhabitants; in a little time you see an ant
struggling through the upturned mould; they reappear by twos and
threes, running hither and thither in search of their lost companions.
Such were we upon earth, wondering aghast at the effects of pestilence.
Our empty habitations remained, but the dwellers were gathered to the
shades of the tomb.

As the rules of order and pressure of laws were lost, some began with
hesitation and wonder to transgress the accustomed uses of society.
Palaces were deserted, and the poor man dared at length, unreproved,
intrude into the splendid apartments, whose very furniture and
decorations were an unknown world to him. It was found, that, though at
first the stop put to all circulation of property, had reduced those
before supported by the factitious wants of society to sudden and
hideous poverty, yet when the boundaries of private possession were
thrown down, the products of human labour at present existing were
more, far more, than the thinned generation could possibly consume. To
some among the poor this was matter of exultation. We were all equal
now; magnificent dwellings, luxurious carpets, and beds of down, were
afforded to all. Carriages and horses, gardens, pictures, statues, and
princely libraries, there were enough of these even to superfluity; and
there was nothing to prevent each from assuming possession of his
share. We were all equal now; but near at hand was an equality still
more levelling, a state where beauty and strength, and wisdom, would be
as vain as riches and birth. The grave yawned beneath us all, and its
prospect prevented any of us from enjoying the ease and plenty which in
so awful a manner was presented to us.

Still the bloom did not fade on the cheeks of my babes; and Clara
sprung up in years and growth, unsullied by disease. We had no reason
to think the site of Windsor Castle peculiarly healthy, for many other
families had expired beneath its roof; we lived therefore without any
particular precaution; but we lived, it seemed, in safety. If Idris
became thin and pale, it was anxiety that occasioned the change; an
anxiety I could in no way alleviate. She never complained, but sleep
and appetite fled from her, a slow fever preyed on her veins, her
colour was hectic, and she often wept in secret; gloomy
prognostications, care, and agonizing dread, ate up the principle of
life within her. I could not fail to perceive this change. I often
wished that I had permitted her to take her own course, and engage
herself in such labours for the welfare of others as might have
distracted her thoughts. But it was too late now. Besides that, with
the nearly extinct race of man, all our toils grew near a conclusion,
she was too weak; consumption, if so it might be called, or rather the
over active life within her, which, as with Adrian, spent the vital oil
in the early morning hours, deprived her limbs of strength. At night,
when she could leave me unperceived, she wandered through the house, or
hung over the couches of her children; and in the day time would sink
into a perturbed sleep, while her murmurs and starts betrayed the
unquiet dreams that vexed her. As this state of wretchedness became
more confirmed, and, in spite of her endeavours at concealment more
apparent, I strove, though vainly, to awaken in her courage and hope. I
could not wonder at the vehemence of her care; her very soul was
tenderness; she trusted indeed that she should not outlive me if I
became the prey of the vast calamity, and this thought sometimes
relieved her. We had for many years trod the highway of life hand in
hand, and still thus linked, we might step within the shades of death;
but her children, her lovely, playful, animated children—beings sprung
from her own dear side—portions of her own being—depositories of our
loves—even if we died, it would be comfort to know that they ran man’s
accustomed course. But it would not be so; young and blooming as they
were, they would die, and from the hopes of maturity, from the proud
name of attained manhood, they were cut off for ever. Often with
maternal affection she had figured their merits and talents exerted on
life’s wide stage. Alas for these latter days! The world had grown old,
and all its inmates partook of the decrepitude. Why talk of infancy,
manhood, and old age? We all stood equal sharers of the last throes of
time-worn nature. Arrived at the same point of the world’s age—there
was no difference in us; the name of parent and child had lost their
meaning; young boys and girls were level now with men. This was all
true; but it was not less agonizing to take the admonition home.

Where could we turn, and not find a desolation pregnant with the dire
lesson of example? The fields had been left uncultivated, weeds and
gaudy flowers sprung up,—or where a few wheat-fields shewed signs of
the living hopes of the husbandman, the work had been left halfway, the
ploughman had died beside the plough; the horses had deserted the
furrow, and no seedsman had approached the dead; the cattle unattended
wandered over the fields and through the lanes; the tame inhabitants of
the poultry yard, baulked of their daily food, had become wild—young
lambs were dropt in flower-gardens, and the cow stalled in the hall of
pleasure. Sickly and few, the country people neither went out to sow
nor reap; but sauntered about the meadows, or lay under the hedges,
when the inclement sky did not drive them to take shelter under the
nearest roof. Many of those who remained, secluded themselves; some had
laid up stores which should prevent the necessity of leaving their
homes;—some deserted wife and child, and imagined that they secured
their safety in utter solitude. Such had been Ryland’s plan, and he was
discovered dead and half-devoured by insects, in a house many miles
from any other, with piles of food laid up in useless superfluity.
Others made long journies to unite themselves to those they loved, and
arrived to find them dead.

London did not contain above a thousand inhabitants; and this number
was continually diminishing. Most of them were country people, come up
for the sake of change; the Londoners had sought the country. The busy
eastern part of the town was silent, or at most you saw only where,
half from cupidity, half from curiosity, the warehouses had been more
ransacked than pillaged: bales of rich India goods, shawls of price,
jewels, and spices, unpacked, strewed the floors. In some places the
possessor had to the last kept watch on his store, and died before the
barred gates. The massy portals of the churches swung creaking on their
hinges; and some few lay dead on the pavement. The wretched female,
loveless victim of vulgar brutality, had wandered to the toilet of
high-born beauty, and, arraying herself in the garb of splendour, had
died before the mirror which reflected to herself alone her altered
appearance. Women whose delicate feet had seldom touched the earth in
their luxury, had fled in fright and horror from their homes, till,
losing themselves in the squalid streets of the metropolis, they had
died on the threshold of poverty. The heart sickened at the variety of
misery presented; and, when I saw a specimen of this gloomy change, my
soul ached with the fear of what might befall my beloved Idris and my
babes. Were they, surviving Adrian and myself, to find themselves
protectorless in the world? As yet the mind alone had suffered—could I
for ever put off the time, when the delicate frame and shrinking nerves
of my child of prosperity, the nursling of rank and wealth, who was my
companion, should be invaded by famine, hardship, and disease? Better
die at once—better plunge a poinard in her bosom, still untouched by
drear adversity, and then again sheathe it in my own! But, no; in times
of misery we must fight against our destinies, and strive not to be
overcome by them. I would not yield, but to the last gasp resolutely
defended my dear ones against sorrow and pain; and if I were vanquished
at last, it should not be ingloriously. I stood in the gap, resisting
the enemy—the impalpable, invisible foe, who had so long besieged us—as
yet he had made no breach: it must be my care that he should not,
secretly undermining, burst up within the very threshold of the temple
of love, at whose altar I daily sacrificed. The hunger of Death was now
stung more sharply by the diminution of his food: or was it that
before, the survivors being many, the dead were less eagerly counted?
Now each life was a gem, each human breathing form of far, O! far more
worth than subtlest imagery of sculptured stone; and the daily, nay,
hourly decrease visible in our numbers, visited the heart with
sickening misery. This summer extinguished our hopes, the vessel of
society was wrecked, and the shattered raft, which carried the few
survivors over the sea of misery, was riven and tempest tost. Man
existed by twos and threes; man, the individual who might sleep, and
wake, and perform the animal functions; but man, in himself weak, yet
more powerful in congregated numbers than wind or ocean; man, the
queller of the elements, the lord of created nature, the peer of
demi-gods, existed no longer.

Farewell to the patriotic scene, to the love of liberty and well earned
meed of virtuous aspiration!—farewell to crowded senate, vocal with the
councils of the wise, whose laws were keener than the sword blade
tempered at Damascus!—farewell to kingly pomp and warlike pageantry;
the crowns are in the dust, and the wearers are in their
graves!—farewell to the desire of rule, and the hope of victory; to
high vaulting ambition, to the appetite for praise, and the craving for
the suffrage of their fellows! The nations are no longer! No senate
sits in council for the dead; no scion of a time honoured dynasty pants
to rule over the inhabitants of a charnel house; the general’s hand is
cold, and the soldier has his untimely grave dug in his native fields,
unhonoured, though in youth. The market-place is empty, the candidate
for popular favour finds none whom he can represent. To chambers of
painted state farewell!—To midnight revelry, and the panting emulation
of beauty, to costly dress and birth-day shew, to title and the gilded
coronet, farewell!

Farewell to the giant powers of man,—to knowledge that could pilot the
deep-drawing bark through the opposing waters of shoreless ocean,—to
science that directed the silken balloon through the pathless air,—to
the power that could put a barrier to mighty waters, and set in motion
wheels, and beams, and vast machinery, that could divide rocks of
granite or marble, and make the mountains plain!

Farewell to the arts,—to eloquence, which is to the human mind as the
winds to the sea, stirring, and then allaying it;—farewell to poetry
and deep philosophy, for man’s imagination is cold, and his enquiring
mind can no longer expatiate on the wonders of life, for “there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou
goest!”—to the graceful building, which in its perfect proportion
transcended the rude forms of nature, the fretted gothic and massy
saracenic pile, to the stupendous arch and glorious dome, the fluted
column with its capital, Corinthian, Ionic, or Doric, the peristyle and
fair entablature, whose harmony of form is to the eye as musical
concord to the ear!—farewell to sculpture, where the pure marble mocks
human flesh, and in the plastic expression of the culled excellencies
of the human shape, shines forth the god!—farewell to painting, the
high wrought sentiment and deep knowledge of the artists’s mind in
pictured canvas—to paradisaical scenes, where trees are ever vernal,
and the ambrosial air rests in perpetual glow:—to the stamped form of
tempest, and wildest uproar of universal nature encaged in the narrow
frame, O farewell! Farewell to music, and the sound of song; to the
marriage of instruments, where the concord of soft and harsh unites in
sweet harmony, and gives wings to the panting listeners, whereby to
climb heaven, and learn the hidden pleasures of the eternals!—Farewell
to the well-trod stage; a truer tragedy is enacted on the world’s ample
scene, that puts to shame mimic grief: to high-bred comedy, and the low
buffoon, farewell!—Man may laugh no more. Alas! to enumerate the
adornments of humanity, shews, by what we have lost, how supremely
great man was. It is all over now. He is solitary; like our first
parents expelled from Paradise, he looks back towards the scene he has
quitted. The high walls of the tomb, and the flaming sword of plague,
lie between it and him. Like to our first parents, the whole earth is
before him, a wide desart. Unsupported and weak, let him wander through
fields where the unreaped corn stands in barren plenty, through copses
planted by his fathers, through towns built for his use. Posterity is
no more; fame, and ambition, and love, are words void of meaning; even
as the cattle that grazes in the field, do thou, O deserted one, lie
down at evening-tide, unknowing of the past, careless of the future,
for from such fond ignorance alone canst thou hope for ease!

Joy paints with its own colours every act and thought. The happy do not
feel poverty—for delight is as a gold-tissued robe, and crowns them
with priceless gems. Enjoyment plays the cook to their homely fare, and
mingles intoxication with their simple drink. Joy strews the hard couch
with roses, and makes labour ease.

Sorrow doubles the burthen to the bent-down back; plants thorns in the
unyielding pillow; mingles gall with water; adds saltness to their
bitter bread; cloathing them in rags, and strewing ashes on their bare
heads. To our irremediable distress every small and pelting
inconvenience came with added force; we had strung our frames to endure
the Atlean weight thrown on us; we sank beneath the added feather
chance threw on us, “the grasshopper was a burthen.” Many of the
survivors had been bred in luxury—their servants were gone, their
powers of command vanished like unreal shadows: the poor even suffered
various privations; and the idea of another winter like the last,
brought affright to our minds. Was it not enough that we must die, but
toil must be added?—must we prepare our funeral repast with labour, and
with unseemly drudgery heap fuel on our deserted hearths —must we with
servile hands fabricate the garments, soon to be our shroud?

Not so! We are presently to die, let us then enjoy to its full relish
the remnant of our lives. Sordid care, avaunt! menial labours, and
pains, slight in themselves, but too gigantic for our exhausted
strength, shall make no part of our ephemeral existences. In the
beginning of time, when, as now, man lived by families, and not by
tribes or nations, they were placed in a genial clime, where earth fed
them untilled, and the balmy air enwrapt their reposing limbs with
warmth more pleasant than beds of down. The south is the native place
of the human race; the land of fruits, more grateful to man than the
hard-earned Ceres of the north,—of trees, whose boughs are as a
palace-roof, of couches of roses, and of the thirst-appeasing grape. We
need not there fear cold and hunger.

Look at England! the grass shoots up high in the meadows; but they are
dank and cold, unfit bed for us. Corn we have none, and the crude
fruits cannot support us. We must seek firing in the bowels of the
earth, or the unkind atmosphere will fill us with rheums and aches. The
labour of hundreds of thousands alone could make this inclement nook
fit habitation for one man. To the south then, to the sun!—where nature
is kind, where Jove has showered forth the contents of Amalthea’s horn,
and earth is garden.

England, late birth-place of excellence and school of the wise, thy
children are gone, thy glory faded! Thou, England, wert the triumph of
man! Small favour was shewn thee by thy Creator, thou Isle of the
North; a ragged canvas naturally, painted by man with alien colours;
but the hues he gave are faded, never more to be renewed. So we must
leave thee, thou marvel of the world; we must bid farewell to thy
clouds, and cold, and scarcity for ever! Thy manly hearts are still;
thy tale of power and liberty at its close! Bereft of man, O little
isle! the ocean waves will buffet thee, and the raven flap his wings
over thee; thy soil will be birth-place of weeds, thy sky will canopy
barrenness. It was not for the rose of Persia thou wert famous, nor the
banana of the east; not for the spicy gales of India, nor the sugar
groves of America; not for thy vines nor thy double harvests, nor for
thy vernal airs, nor solstitial sun—but for thy children, their
unwearied industry and lofty aspiration. They are gone, and thou goest
with them the oft trodden path that leads to oblivion, —

Farewell, sad Isle, farewell, thy fatal glory
Is summed, cast up, and cancelled in this story.[20]


 [19] Elton’s translation of Hesiod.


 [20] Cleveland’s Poems.




CHAPTER II.


In the autumn of this year 2096, the spirit of emigration crept in
among the few survivors, who, congregating from various parts of
England, met in London. This spirit existed as a breath, a wish, a far
off thought, until communicated to Adrian, who imbibed it with ardour,
and instantly engaged himself in plans for its execution. The fear of
immediate death vanished with the heats of September. Another winter
was before us, and we might elect our mode of passing it to the best
advantage. Perhaps in rational philosophy none could be better chosen
than this scheme of migration, which would draw us from the immediate
scene of our woe, and, leading us through pleasant and picturesque
countries, amuse for a time our despair. The idea once broached, all
were impatient to put it in execution.

We were still at Windsor; our renewed hopes medicined the anguish we
had suffered from the late tragedies. The death of many of our inmates
had weaned us from the fond idea, that Windsor Castle was a spot sacred
from the plague; but our lease of life was renewed for some months, and
even Idris lifted her head, as a lily after a storm, when a last
sunbeam tinges its silver cup. Just at this time Adrian came down to
us; his eager looks shewed us that he was full of some scheme. He
hastened to take me aside, and disclosed to me with rapidity his plan
of emigration from England.

To leave England for ever! to turn from its polluted fields and groves,
and, placing the sea between us, to quit it, as a sailor quits the rock
on which he has been wrecked, when the saving ship rides by. Such was
his plan.

To leave the country of our fathers, made holy by their graves!—We
could not feel even as a voluntary exile of old, who might for pleasure
or convenience forsake his native soil; though thousands of miles might
divide him, England was still a part of him, as he of her. He heard of
the passing events of the day; he knew that, if he returned, and
resumed his place in society, the entrance was still open, and it
required but the will, to surround himself at once with the
associations and habits of boyhood. Not so with us, the remnant. We
left none to represent us, none to repeople the desart land, and the
name of England died, when we left her,

In vagabond pursuit of dreadful safety.


Yet let us go! England is in her shroud,—we may not enchain ourselves
to a corpse. Let us go—the world is our country now, and we will choose
for our residence its most fertile spot. Shall we, in these desart
halls, under this wintry sky, sit with closed eyes and folded hands,
expecting death? Let us rather go out to meet it gallantly: or
perhaps—for all this pendulous orb, this fair gem in the sky’s diadem,
is not surely plague-striken—perhaps, in some secluded nook, amidst
eternal spring, and waving trees, and purling streams, we may find
Life. The world is vast, and England, though her many fields and wide
spread woods seem interminable, is but a small part of her. At the
close of a day’s march over high mountains and through snowy vallies,
we may come upon health, and committing our loved ones to its charge,
replant the uprooted tree of humanity, and send to late posterity the
tale of the ante-pestilential race, the heroes and sages of the lost
state of things.

Hope beckons and sorrow urges us, the heart beats high with
expectation, and this eager desire of change must be an omen of
success. O come! Farewell to the dead! farewell to the tombs of those
we loved!—farewell to giant London and the placid Thames, to river and
mountain or fair district, birth-place of the wise and good, to Windsor
Forest and its antique castle, farewell! themes for story alone are
they,—we must live elsewhere.

Such were in part the arguments of Adrian, uttered with enthusiasm and
unanswerable rapidity. Something more was in his heart, to which he
dared not give words. He felt that the end of time was come; he knew
that one by one we should dwindle into nothingness. It was not
adviseable to wait this sad consummation in our native country; but
travelling would give us our object for each day, that would distract
our thoughts from the swift-approaching end of things. If we went to
Italy, to sacred and eternal Rome, we might with greater patience
submit to the decree, which had laid her mighty towers low. We might
lose our selfish grief in the sublime aspect of its desolation. All
this was in the mind of Adrian; but he thought of my children, and,
instead of communicating to me these resources of despair, he called up
the image of health and life to be found, where we knew not—when we
knew not; but if never to be found, for ever and for ever to be sought.
He won me over to his party, heart and soul.

It devolved on me to disclose our plan to Idris. The images of health
and hope which I presented to her, made her with a smile consent. With
a smile she agreed to leave her country, from which she had never
before been absent, and the spot she had inhabited from infancy; the
forest and its mighty trees, the woodland paths and green recesses,
where she had played in childhood, and had lived so happily through
youth; she would leave them without regret, for she hoped to purchase
thus the lives of her children. They were her life; dearer than a spot
consecrated to love, dearer than all else the earth contained. The boys
heard with childish glee of our removal: Clara asked if we were to go
to Athens. “It is possible,” I replied; and her countenance became
radiant with pleasure. There she would behold the tomb of her parents,
and the territory filled with recollections of her father’s glory. In
silence, but without respite, she had brooded over these scenes. It was
the recollection of them that had turned her infant gaiety to
seriousness, and had impressed her with high and restless thoughts.

There were many dear friends whom we must not leave behind, humble
though they were. There was the spirited and obedient steed which Lord
Raymond had given his daughter; there was Alfred’s dog and a pet eagle,
whose sight was dimmed through age. But this catalogue of favourites to
be taken with us, could not be made without grief to think of our heavy
losses, and a deep sigh for the many things we must leave behind. The
tears rushed into the eyes of Idris, while Alfred and Evelyn brought
now a favourite rose tree, now a marble vase beautifully carved,
insisting that these must go, and exclaiming on the pity that we could
not take the castle and the forest, the deer and the birds, and all
accustomed and cherished objects along with us. “Fond and foolish
ones,” I said, “we have lost for ever treasures far more precious than
these; and we desert them, to preserve treasures to which in comparison
they are nothing. Let us not for a moment forget our object and our
hope; and they will form a resistless mound to stop the overflowing of
our regret for trifles.”

The children were easily distracted, and again returned to their
prospect of future amusement. Idris had disappeared. She had gone to
hide her weakness; escaping from the castle, she had descended to the
little park, and sought solitude, that she might there indulge her
tears; I found her clinging round an old oak, pressing its rough trunk
with her roseate lips, as her tears fell plenteously, and her sobs and
broken exclamations could not be suppressed; with surpassing grief I
beheld this loved one of my heart thus lost in sorrow! I drew her
towards me; and, as she felt my kisses on her eyelids, as she felt my
arms press her, she revived to the knowledge of what remained to her.
“You are very kind not to reproach me,” she said: “I weep, and a bitter
pang of intolerable sorrow tears my heart. And yet I am happy; mothers
lament their children, wives lose their husbands, while you and my
children are left to me. Yes, I am happy, most happy, that I can weep
thus for imaginary sorrows, and that the slight loss of my adored
country is not dwindled and annihilated in mightier misery. Take me
where you will; where you and my children are, there shall be Windsor,
and every country will be England to me. Let these tears flow not for
myself, happy and ungrateful as I am, but for the dead world—for our
lost country—for all of love, and life, and joy, now choked in the
dusty chambers of death.”

She spoke quickly, as if to convince herself; she turned her eyes from
the trees and forest-paths she loved; she hid her face in my bosom, and
we— yes, _my_ masculine firmness dissolved—we wept together consolatory
tears, and then calm—nay, almost cheerful, we returned to the castle.

The first cold weather of an English October, made us hasten our
preparations. I persuaded Idris to go up to London, where she might
better attend to necessary arrangements. I did not tell her, that to
spare her the pang of parting from inanimate objects, now the only
things left, I had resolved that we should none of us return to
Windsor. For the last time we looked on the wide extent of country
visible from the terrace, and saw the last rays of the sun tinge the
dark masses of wood variegated by autumnal tints; the uncultivated
fields and smokeless cottages lay in shadow below; the Thames wound
through the wide plain, and the venerable pile of Eton college, stood
in dark relief, a prominent object; the cawing of the myriad rooks
which inhabited the trees of the little park, as in column or thick
wedge they speeded to their nests, disturbed the silence of evening.
Nature was the same, as when she was the kind mother of the human race;
now, childless and forlorn, her fertility was a mockery; her loveliness
a mask for deformity. Why should the breeze gently stir the trees, man
felt not its refreshment? Why did dark night adorn herself with
stars—man saw them not? Why are there fruits, or flowers, or streams,
man is not here to enjoy them?

Idris stood beside me, her dear hand locked in mine. Her face was
radiant with a smile.—“The sun is alone,” she said, “but we are not. A
strange star, my Lionel, ruled our birth; sadly and with dismay we may
look upon the annihilation of man; but we remain for each other. Did I
ever in the wide world seek other than thee? And since in the wide
world thou remainest, why should I complain? Thou and nature are still
true to me. Beneath the shades of night, and through the day, whose
garish light displays our solitude, thou wilt still be at my side, and
even Windsor will not be regretted.”

I had chosen night time for our journey to London, that the change and
desolation of the country might be the less observable. Our only
surviving servant drove us. We past down the steep hill, and entered
the dusky avenue of the Long Walk. At times like these, minute
circumstances assume giant and majestic proportions; the very swinging
open of the white gate that admitted us into the forest, arrested my
thoughts as matter of interest; it was an every day act, never to occur
again! The setting crescent of the moon glittered through the massy
trees to our right, and when we entered the park, we scared a troop of
deer, that fled bounding away in the forest shades. Our two boys
quietly slept; once, before our road turned from the view, I looked
back on the castle. Its windows glistened in the moonshine, and its
heavy outline lay in a dark mass against the sky—the trees near us
waved a solemn dirge to the midnight breeze. Idris leaned back in the
carriage; her two hands pressed mine, her countenance was placid, she
seemed to lose the sense of what she now left, in the memory of what
she still possessed.

My thoughts were sad and solemn, yet not of unmingled pain. The very
excess of our misery carried a relief with it, giving sublimity and
elevation to sorrow. I felt that I carried with me those I best loved;
I was pleased, after a long separation to rejoin Adrian; never again to
part. I felt that I quitted what I loved, not what loved me. The castle
walls, and long familiar trees, did not hear the parting sound of our
carriage-wheels with regret. And, while I felt Idris to be near, and
heard the regular breathing of my children, I could not be unhappy.
Clara was greatly moved; with streaming eyes, suppressing her sobs, she
leaned from the window, watching the last glimpse of her native
Windsor.

Adrian welcomed us on our arrival. He was all animation; you could no
longer trace in his look of health, the suffering valetudinarian; from
his smile and sprightly tones you could not guess that he was about to
lead forth from their native country, the numbered remnant of the
English nation, into the tenantless realms of the south, there to die,
one by one, till the LAST MAN should remain in a voiceless, empty
world.

Adrian was impatient for our departure, and had advanced far in his
preparations. His wisdom guided all. His care was the soul, to move the
luckless crowd, who relied wholly on him. It was useless to provide
many things, for we should find abundant provision in every town. It
was Adrian’s wish to prevent all labour; to bestow a festive appearance
on this funeral train. Our numbers amounted to not quite two thousand
persons. These were not all assembled in London, but each day witnessed
the arrival of fresh numbers, and those who resided in the neighbouring
towns, had received orders to assemble at one place, on the twentieth
of November. Carriages and horses were provided for all; captains and
under officers chosen, and the whole assemblage wisely organized. All
obeyed the Lord Protector of dying England; all looked up to him. His
council was chosen, it consisted of about fifty persons. Distinction
and station were not the qualifications of their election. We had no
station among us, but that which benevolence and prudence gave; no
distinction save between the living and the dead. Although we were
anxious to leave England before the depth of winter, yet we were
detained. Small parties had been dispatched to various parts of
England, in search of stragglers; we would not go, until we had assured
ourselves that in all human probability we did not leave behind a
single human being.

On our arrival in London, we found that the aged Countess of Windsor
was residing with her son in the palace of the Protectorate; we
repaired to our accustomed abode near Hyde Park. Idris now for the
first time for many years saw her mother, anxious to assure herself
that the childishness of old age did not mingle with unforgotten pride,
to make this high-born dame still so inveterate against me. Age and
care had furrowed her cheeks, and bent her form; but her eye was still
bright, her manners authoritative and unchanged; she received her
daughter coldly, but displayed more feeling as she folded her
grand-children in her arms. It is our nature to wish to continue our
systems and thoughts to posterity through our own offspring. The
Countess had failed in this design with regard to her children; perhaps
she hoped to find the next remove in birth more tractable. Once Idris
named me casually—a frown, a convulsive gesture of anger, shook her
mother, and, with voice trembling with hate, she said—“I am of little
worth in this world; the young are impatient to push the old off the
scene; but, Idris, if you do not wish to see your mother expire at your
feet, never again name that person to me; all else I can bear; and now
I am resigned to the destruction of my cherished hopes: but it is too
much to require that I should love the instrument that providence
gifted with murderous properties for my destruction.”

This was a strange speech, now that, on the empty stage, each might
play his part without impediment from the other. But the haughty
Ex-Queen thought as Octavius Cæsar and Mark Antony,

We could not stall together
In the whole world.


The period of our departure was fixed for the twenty-fifth of November.
The weather was temperate; soft rains fell at night, and by day the
wintry sun shone out. Our numbers were to move forward in separate
parties, and to go by different routes, all to unite at last at Paris.
Adrian and his division, consisting in all of five hundred persons,
were to take the direction of Dover and Calais. On the twentieth of
November, Adrian and I rode for the last time through the streets of
London. They were grass-grown and desert. The open doors of the empty
mansions creaked upon their hinges; rank herbage, and deforming dirt,
had swiftly accumulated on the steps of the houses; the voiceless
steeples of the churches pierced the smokeless air; the churches were
open, but no prayer was offered at the altars; mildew and damp had
already defaced their ornaments; birds, and tame animals, now homeless,
had built nests, and made their lairs in consecrated spots. We passed
St. Paul’s. London, which had extended so far in suburbs in all
direction, had been somewhat deserted in the midst, and much of what
had in former days obscured this vast building was removed. Its
ponderous mass, blackened stone, and high dome, made it look, not like
a temple, but a tomb. Methought above the portico was engraved the _Hic
jacet_ of England. We passed on eastwards, engaged in such solemn talk
as the times inspired. No human step was heard, nor human form
discerned. Troops of dogs, deserted of their masters, passed us; and
now and then a horse, unbridled and unsaddled, trotted towards us, and
tried to attract the attention of those which we rode, as if to allure
them to seek like liberty. An unwieldy ox, who had fed in an abandoned
granary, suddenly lowed, and shewed his shapeless form in a narrow
door-way; every thing was desert; but nothing was in ruin. And this
medley of undamaged buildings, and luxurious accommodation, in trim and
fresh youth, was contrasted with the lonely silence of the unpeopled
streets.

Night closed in, and it began to rain. We were about to return
homewards, when a voice, a human voice, strange now to hear, attracted
our attention. It was a child singing a merry, lightsome air; there was
no other sound. We had traversed London from Hyde Park even to where we
now were in the Minories, and had met no person, heard no voice nor
footstep. The singing was interrupted by laughing and talking; never
was merry ditty so sadly timed, never laughter more akin to tears. The
door of the house from which these sounds proceeded was open, the upper
rooms were illuminated as for a feast. It was a large magnificent
house, in which doubtless some rich merchant had lived. The singing
again commenced, and rang through the high-roofed rooms, while we
silently ascended the stair-case. Lights now appeared to guide us; and
a long suite of splendid rooms illuminated, made us still more wonder.
Their only inhabitant, a little girl, was dancing, waltzing, and
singing about them, followed by a large Newfoundland dog, who
boisterously jumping on her, and interrupting her, made her now scold,
now laugh, now throw herself on the carpet to play with him. She was
dressed grotesquely, in glittering robes and shawls fit for a woman;
she appeared about ten years of age. We stood at the door looking on
this strange scene, till the dog perceiving us barked loudly; the child
turned and saw us: her face, losing its gaiety, assumed a sullen
expression: she slunk back, apparently meditating an escape. I came up
to her, and held her hand; she did not resist, but with a stern brow,
so strange in childhood, so different from her former hilarity, she
stood still, her eyes fixed on the ground. “What do you do here?” I
said gently; “Who are you?”—she was silent, but trembled violently.—“My
poor child,” asked Adrian, “are you alone?” There was a winning
softness in his voice, that went to the heart of the little girl; she
looked at him, then snatching her hand from me, threw herself into his
arms, clinging round his neck, ejaculating—“Save me! save me!” while
her unnatural sullenness dissolved in tears.

“I will save you,” he replied, “of what are you afraid? you need not
fear my friend, he will do you no harm. Are you alone?”

“No, Lion is with me.”

“And your father and mother?—”

“I never had any; I am a charity girl. Every body is gone, gone for a
great, great many days; but if they come back and find me out, they
will beat me so!”

Her unhappy story was told in these few words: an orphan, taken on
pretended charity, ill-treated and reviled, her oppressors had died:
unknowing of what had passed around her, she found herself alone; she
had not dared venture out, but by the continuance of her solitude her
courage revived, her childish vivacity caused her to play a thousand
freaks, and with her brute companion she passed a long holiday, fearing
nothing but the return of the harsh voices and cruel usage of her
protectors. She readily consented to go with Adrian.

In the mean time, while we descanted on alien sorrows, and on a
solitude which struck our eyes and not our hearts, while we imagined
all of change and suffering that had intervened in these once thronged
streets, before, tenantless and abandoned, they became mere kennels for
dogs, and stables for cattle:—while we read the death of the world upon
the dark fane, and hugged ourselves in the remembrance that we
possessed that which was all the world to us—in the meanwhile—-

We had arrived from Windsor early in October, and had now been in
London about six weeks. Day by day, during that time, the health of my
Idris declined: her heart was broken; neither sleep nor appetite, the
chosen servants of health, waited on her wasted form. To watch her
children hour by hour, to sit by me, drinking deep the dear persuasion
that I remained to her, was all her pastime. Her vivacity, so long
assumed, her affectionate display of cheerfulness, her light-hearted
tone and springy gait were gone. I could not disguise to myself, nor
could she conceal, her life-consuming sorrow. Still change of scene,
and reviving hopes might restore her; I feared the plague only, and she
was untouched by that.

I had left her this evening, reposing after the fatigues of her
preparations. Clara sat beside her, relating a story to the two boys.
The eyes of Idris were closed: but Clara perceived a sudden change in
the appearance of our eldest darling; his heavy lids veiled his eyes,
an unnatural colour burnt in his cheeks, his breath became short. Clara
looked at the mother; she slept, yet started at the pause the narrator
made— Fear of awakening and alarming her, caused Clara to go on at the
eager call of Evelyn, who was unaware of what was passing. Her eyes
turned alternately from Alfred to Idris; with trembling accents she
continued her tale, till she saw the child about to fall: starting
forward she caught him, and her cry roused Idris. She looked on her
son. She saw death stealing across his features; she laid him on a bed,
she held drink to his parched lips.

Yet he might be saved. If I were there, he might be saved; perhaps it
was not the plague. Without a counsellor, what could she do? stay and
behold him die! Why at that moment was I away? “Look to him, Clara,”
she exclaimed, “I will return immediately.”

She inquired among those who, selected as the companions of our
journey, had taken up their residence in our house; she heard from them
merely that I had gone out with Adrian. She entreated them to seek me:
she returned to her child, he was plunged in a frightful state of
torpor; again she rushed down stairs; all was dark, desert, and silent;
she lost all self-possession; she ran into the street; she called on my
name. The pattering rain and howling wind alone replied to her. Wild
fear gave wings to her feet; she darted forward to seek me, she knew
not where; but, putting all her thoughts, all her energy, all her being
in speed only, most misdirected speed, she neither felt, nor feared,
nor paused, but ran right on, till her strength suddenly deserted her
so suddenly, that she had not thought to save herself. Her knees failed
her, and she fell heavily on the pavement. She was stunned for a time;
but at length rose, and though sorely hurt, still walked on, shedding a
fountain of tears, stumbling at times, going she knew not whither, only
now and then with feeble voice she called my name, adding with
heart-piercing exclamations, that I was cruel and unkind. Human being
there was none to reply; and the inclemency of the night had driven the
wandering animals to the habitations they had usurped. Her thin dress
was drenched with rain; her wet hair clung round her neck; she tottered
through the dark streets; till, striking her foot against an unseen
impediment, she again fell; she could not rise; she hardly strove; but,
gathering up her limbs, she resigned herself to the fury of the
elements, and the bitter grief of her own heart. She breathed an
earnest prayer to die speedily, for there was no relief but death.
While hopeless of safety for herself, she ceased to lament for her
dying child, but shed kindly, bitter tears for the grief I should
experience in losing her. While she lay, life almost suspended, she
felt a warm, soft hand on her brow, and a gentle female voice asked
her, with expressions of tender compassion, if she could not rise? That
another human being, sympathetic and kind, should exist near, roused
her; half rising, with clasped hands, and fresh springing tears, she
entreated her companion to seek for me, to bid me hasten to my dying
child, to save him, for the love of heaven, to save him!

The woman raised her; she led her under shelter, she entreated her to
return to her home, whither perhaps I had already returned. Idris
easily yielded to her persuasions, she leaned on the arm of her friend,
she endeavoured to walk on, but irresistible faintness made her pause
again and again.

Quickened by the encreasing storm, we had hastened our return, our
little charge was placed before Adrian on his horse. There was an
assemblage of persons under the portico of our house, in whose gestures
I instinctively read some heavy change, some new misfortune. With swift
alarm, afraid to ask a single question, I leapt from my horse; the
spectators saw me, knew me, and in awful silence divided to make way
for me. I snatched a light, and rushing up stairs, and hearing a groan,
without reflection I threw open the door of the first room that
presented itself. It was quite dark; but, as I stept within, a
pernicious scent assailed my senses, producing sickening qualms, which
made their way to my very heart, while I felt my leg clasped, and a
groan repeated by the person that held me. I lowered my lamp, and saw a
negro half clad, writhing under the agony of disease, while he held me
with a convulsive grasp. With mixed horror and impatience I strove to
disengage myself, and fell on the sufferer; he wound his naked
festering arms round me, his face was close to mine, and his breath,
death-laden, entered my vitals. For a moment I was overcome, my head
was bowed by aching nausea; till, reflection returning, I sprung up,
threw the wretch from me, and darting up the staircase, entered the
chamber usually inhabited by my family. A dim light shewed me Alfred on
a couch; Clara trembling, and paler than whitest snow, had raised him
on her arm, holding a cup of water to his lips. I saw full well that no
spark of life existed in that ruined form, his features were rigid, his
eyes glazed, his head had fallen back. I took him from her, I laid him
softly down, kissed his cold little mouth, and turned to speak in a
vain whisper, when loudest sound of thunderlike cannon could not have
reached him in his immaterial abode.

And where was Idris? That she had gone out to seek me, and had not
returned, were fearful tidings, while the rain and driving wind
clattered against the window, and roared round the house. Added to
this, the sickening sensation of disease gained upon me; no time was to
be lost, if ever I would see her again. I mounted my horse and rode out
to seek her, fancying that I heard her voice in every gust, oppressed
by fever and aching pain.

I rode in the dark and rain through the labyrinthine streets of
unpeopled London. My child lay dead at home; the seeds of mortal
disease had taken root in my bosom; I went to seek Idris, my adored,
now wandering alone, while the waters were rushing from heaven like a
cataract to bathe her dear head in chill damp, her fair limbs in
numbing cold. A female stood on the step of a door, and called to me as
I gallopped past. It was not Idris; so I rode swiftly on, until a kind
of second sight, a reflection back again on my senses of what I had
seen but not marked, made me feel sure that another figure, thin,
graceful and tall, stood clinging to the foremost person who supported
her. In a minute I was beside the suppliant, in a minute I received the
sinking Idris in my arms. Lifting her up, I placed her on the horse;
she had not strength to support herself; so I mounted behind her, and
held her close to my bosom, wrapping my riding-cloak round her, while
her companion, whose well known, but changed countenance, (it was
Juliet, daughter of the Duke of L—-) could at this moment of horror
obtain from me no more than a passing glance of compassion. She took
the abandoned rein, and conducted our obedient steed homewards. Dare I
avouch it? That was the last moment of my happiness; but I was happy.
Idris must die, for her heart was broken: I must die, for I had caught
the plague; earth was a scene of desolation; hope was madness; life had
married death; they were one; but, thus supporting my fainting love,
thus feeling that I must soon die, I revelled in the delight of
possessing her once more; again and again I kissed her, and pressed her
to my heart.

We arrived at our home. I assisted her to dismount, I carried her up
stairs, and gave her into Clara’s care, that her wet garments might be
changed. Briefly I assured Adrian of her safety, and requested that we
might be left to repose. As the miser, who with trembling caution
visits his treasure to count it again and again, so I numbered each
moment, and grudged every one that was not spent with Idris. I returned
swiftly to the chamber where the life of my life reposed; before I
entered the room I paused for a few seconds; for a few seconds I tried
to examine my state; sickness and shuddering ever and anon came over
me; my head was heavy, my chest oppressed, my legs bent under me; but I
threw off resolutely the swift growing symptoms of my disorder, and met
Idris with placid and even joyous looks. She was lying on a couch;
carefully fastening the door to prevent all intrusion; I sat by her, we
embraced, and our lips met in a kiss long drawn and breathless—would
that moment had been my last!

Maternal feeling now awoke in my poor girl’s bosom, and she asked: “And
Alfred?”

“Idris,” I replied, “we are spared to each other, we are together; do
not let any other idea intrude. I am happy; even on this fatal night, I
declare myself happy, beyond all name, all thought—what would you more,
sweet one?”

Idris understood me: she bowed her head on my shoulder and wept. “Why,”
she again asked, “do you tremble, Lionel, what shakes you thus?”

“Well may I be shaken,” I replied, “happy as I am. Our child is dead,
and the present hour is dark and ominous. Well may I tremble! but, I am
happy, mine own Idris, most happy.”

“I understand thee, my kind love,” said Idris, “thus—pale as thou art
with sorrow at our loss; trembling and aghast, though wouldest assuage
my grief by thy dear assurances. I am not happy,” (and the tears
flashed and fell from under her down-cast lids), “for we are inmates of
a miserable prison, and there is no joy for us; but the true love I
bear you will render this and every other loss endurable.”

“We have been happy together, at least,” I said; “no future misery can
deprive us of the past. We have been true to each other for years, ever
since my sweet princess-love came through the snow to the lowly cottage
of the poverty-striken heir of the ruined Verney. Even now, that
eternity is before us, we take hope only from the presence of each
other. Idris, do you think, that when we die, we shall be divided?”

“Die! when we die! what mean you? What secret lies hid from me in those
dreadful words?”

“Must we not all die, dearest?” I asked with a sad smile.

“Gracious God! are you ill, Lionel, that you speak of death? My only
friend, heart of my heart, speak!”

“I do not think,” replied I, “that we have any of us long to live; and
when the curtain drops on this mortal scene, where, think you, we shall
find ourselves?” Idris was calmed by my unembarrassed tone and look;
she answered:—“You may easily believe that during this long progress of
the plague, I have thought much on death, and asked myself, now that
all mankind is dead to this life, to what other life they may have been
borne. Hour after hour, I have dwelt on these thoughts, and strove to
form a rational conclusion concerning the mystery of a future state.
What a scare-crow, indeed, would death be, if we were merely to cast
aside the shadow in which we now walk, and, stepping forth into the
unclouded sunshine of knowledge and love, revived with the same
companions, the same affections, and reached the fulfilment of our
hopes, leaving our fears with our earthly vesture in the grave. Alas!
the same strong feeling which makes me sure that I shall not wholly
die, makes me refuse to believe that I shall live wholly as I do now.
Yet, Lionel, never, never, can I love any but you; through eternity I
must desire your society; and, as I am innocent of harm to others, and
as relying and confident as my mortal nature permits, I trust that the
Ruler of the world will never tear us asunder.”

“Your remarks are like yourself, dear love,” replied I, “gentle and
good; let us cherish such a belief, and dismiss anxiety from our minds.
But, sweet, we are so formed, (and there is no sin, if God made our
nature, to yield to what he ordains), we are so formed, that we must
love life, and cling to it; we must love the living smile, the
sympathetic touch, and thrilling voice, peculiar to our mortal
mechanism. Let us not, through security in hereafter, neglect the
present. This present moment, short as it is, is a part of eternity,
and the dearest part, since it is our own unalienably. Thou, the hope
of my futurity, art my present joy. Let me then look on thy dear eyes,
and, reading love in them, drink intoxicating pleasure.”

Timidly, for my vehemence somewhat terrified her, Idris looked on me.
My eyes were bloodshot, starting from my head; every artery beat,
methought, audibly, every muscle throbbed, each single nerve felt. Her
look of wild affright told me, that I could no longer keep my
secret:—“So it is, mine own beloved,” I said, “the last hour of many
happy ones is arrived, nor can we shun any longer the inevitable
destiny. I cannot live long—but, again and again, I say, this moment is
ours!”

Paler than marble, with white lips and convulsed features, Idris became
aware of my situation. My arm, as I sat, encircled her waist. She felt
the palm burn with fever, even on the heart it pressed:—“One moment,”
she murmured, scarce audibly, “only one moment.”—

She kneeled, and hiding her face in her hands, uttered a brief, but
earnest prayer, that she might fulfil her duty, and watch over me to
the last. While there was hope, the agony had been unendurable;—all was
now concluded; her feelings became solemn and calm. Even as Epicharis,
unperturbed and firm, submitted to the instruments of torture, did
Idris, suppressing every sigh and sign of grief, enter upon the
endurance of torments, of which the rack and the wheel are but faint
and metaphysical symbols.

I was changed; the tight-drawn cord that sounded so harshly was
loosened, the moment that Idris participated in my knowledge of our
real situation. The perturbed and passion-tossed waves of thought
subsided, leaving only the heavy swell that kept right on without any
outward manifestation of its disturbance, till it should break on the
remote shore towards which I rapidly advanced:—“It is true that I am
sick,” I said, “and your society, my Idris is my only medicine; come,
and sit beside me.”

She made me lie down on the couch, and, drawing a low ottoman near, sat
close to my pillow, pressing my burning hands in her cold palms. She
yielded to my feverish restlessness, and let me talk, and talked to me,
on subjects strange indeed to beings, who thus looked the last, and
heard the last, of what they loved alone in the world. We talked of
times gone by; of the happy period of our early love; of Raymond,
Perdita, and Evadne. We talked of what might arise on this desert
earth, if, two or three being saved, it were slowly re-peopled.—We
talked of what was beyond the tomb; and, man in his human shape being
nearly extinct, we felt with certainty of faith, that other spirits,
other minds, other perceptive beings, sightless to us, must people with
thought and love this beauteous and imperishable universe.

We talked—I know not how long—but, in the morning I awoke from a
painful heavy slumber; the pale cheek of Idris rested on my pillow; the
large orbs of her eyes half raised the lids, and shewed the deep blue
lights beneath; her lips were unclosed, and the slight murmurs they
formed told that, even while asleep, she suffered. “If she were dead,”
I thought, “what difference? now that form is the temple of a residing
deity; those eyes are the windows of her soul; all grace, love, and
intelligence are throned on that lovely bosom—were she dead, where
would this mind, the dearer half of mine, be? For quickly the fair
proportion of this edifice would be more defaced, than are the
sand-choked ruins of the desert temples of Palmyra.”




CHAPTER III.


Idris stirred and awoke; alas! she awoke to misery. She saw the signs
of disease on my countenance, and wondered how she could permit the
long night to pass without her having sought, not cure, that was
impossible, but alleviation to my sufferings. She called Adrian; my
couch was quickly surrounded by friends and assistants, and such
medicines as were judged fitting were administered. It was the peculiar
and dreadful distinction of our visitation, that none who had been
attacked by the pestilence had recovered. The first symptom of the
disease was the death-warrant, which in no single instance had been
followed by pardon or reprieve. No gleam of hope therefore cheered my
friends.

While fever producing torpor, heavy pains, sitting like lead on my
limbs, and making my breast heave, were upon me; I continued insensible
to every thing but pain, and at last even to that. I awoke on the
fourth morning as from a dreamless sleep. An irritating sense of
thirst, and, when I strove to speak or move, an entire dereliction of
power, was all I felt.

For three days and nights Idris had not moved from my side. She
administered to all my wants, and never slept nor rested. She did not
hope; and therefore she neither endeavoured to read the physician’s
countenance, nor to watch for symptoms of recovery. All her thought was
to attend on me to the last, and then to lie down and die beside me. On
the third night animation was suspended; to the eye and touch of all I
was dead. With earnest prayer, almost with force, Adrian tried to draw
Idris from me. He exhausted every adjuration, her child’s welfare and
his own. She shook her head, and wiped a stealing tear from her sunk
cheek, but would not yield; she entreated to be allowed to watch me
that one night only, with such affliction and meek earnestness, that
she gained her point, and sat silent and motionless, except when, stung
by intolerable remembrance, she kissed my closed eyes and pallid lips,
and pressed my stiffening hands to her beating heart.

At dead of night, when, though it was mid winter, the cock crowed at
three o’clock, as herald of the morning change, while hanging over me,
and mourning in silent, bitter thought for the loss of all of love
towards her that had been enshrined in my heart; her dishevelled hair
hung over her face, and the long tresses fell on the bed; she saw one
ringlet in motion, and the scattered hair slightly stirred, as by a
breath. It is not so, she thought, for he will never breathe more.
Several times the same thing occurred, and she only marked it by the
same reflection; till the whole ringlet waved back, and she thought she
saw my breast heave. Her first emotion was deadly fear, cold dew stood
on her brow; my eyes half opened; and, re-assured, she would have
exclaimed, “He lives!” but the words were choked by a spasm, and she
fell with a groan on the floor.

Adrian was in the chamber. After long watching, he had unwillingly
fallen into a sleep. He started up, and beheld his sister senseless on
the earth, weltering in a stream of blood that gushed from her mouth.
Encreasing signs of life in me in some degree explained her state; the
surprise, the burst of joy, the revulsion of every sentiment, had been
too much for her frame, worn by long months of care, late shattered by
every species of woe and toil. She was now in far greater danger than
I, the wheels and springs of my life, once again set in motion,
acquired elasticity from their short suspension. For a long time, no
one believed that I should indeed continue to live; during the reign of
the plague upon earth, not one person, attacked by the grim disease,
had recovered. My restoration was looked on as a deception; every
moment it was expected that the evil symptoms would recur with
redoubled violence, until confirmed convalescence, absence of all fever
or pain, and encreasing strength, brought slow conviction that I had
recovered from the plague.

The restoration of Idris was more problematical. When I had been
attacked by illness, her cheeks were sunk, her form emaciated; but now,
the vessel, which had broken from the effects of extreme agitation, did
not entirely heal, but was as a channel that drop by drop drew from her
the ruddy stream that vivified her heart. Her hollow eyes and worn
countenance had a ghastly appearance; her cheek-bones, her open fair
brow, the projection of the mouth, stood fearfully prominent; you might
tell each bone in the thin anatomy of her frame. Her hand hung
powerless; each joint lay bare, so that the light penetrated through
and through. It was strange that life could exist in what was wasted
and worn into a very type of death.

To take her from these heart-breaking scenes, to lead her to forget the
world’s desolation in the variety of objects presented by travelling,
and to nurse her failing strength in the mild climate towards which we
had resolved to journey, was my last hope for her preservation. The
preparations for our departure, which had been suspended during my
illness, were renewed. I did not revive to doubtful convalescence;
health spent her treasures upon me; as the tree in spring may feel from
its wrinkled limbs the fresh green break forth, and the living sap rise
and circulate, so did the renewed vigour of my frame, the cheerful
current of my blood, the new-born elasticity of my limbs, influence my
mind to cheerful endurance and pleasurable thoughts. My body, late the
heavy weight that bound me to the tomb, was exuberant with health; mere
common exercises were insufficient for my reviving strength; methought
I could emulate the speed of the race-horse, discern through the air
objects at a blinding distance, hear the operations of nature in her
mute abodes; my senses had become so refined and susceptible after my
recovery from mortal disease.

Hope, among my other blessings, was not denied to me; and I did fondly
trust that my unwearied attentions would restore my adored girl. I was
therefore eager to forward our preparations. According to the plan
first laid down, we were to have quitted London on the twenty-fifth of
November; and, in pursuance of this scheme, two-thirds of our
people—_the_ people— all that remained of England, had gone forward,
and had already been some weeks in Paris. First my illness, and
subsequently that of Idris, had detained Adrian with his division,
which consisted of three hundred persons, so that we now departed on
the first of January, 2098. It was my wish to keep Idris as distant as
possible from the hurry and clamour of the crowd, and to hide from her
those appearances that would remind her most forcibly of our real
situation. We separated ourselves to a great degree from Adrian, who
was obliged to give his whole time to public business. The Countess of
Windsor travelled with her son. Clara, Evelyn, and a female who acted
as our attendant, were the only persons with whom we had contact. We
occupied a commodious carriage, our servant officiated as coachman. A
party of about twenty persons preceded us at a small distance. They had
it in charge to prepare our halting places and our nightly abode. They
had been selected for this service out of a great number that offered,
on account of the superior sagacity of the man who had been appointed
their leader.

Immediately on our departure, I was delighted to find a change in
Idris, which I fondly hoped prognosticated the happiest results. All
the cheerfulness and gentle gaiety natural to her revived. She was
weak, and this alteration was rather displayed in looks and voice than
in acts; but it was permanent and real. My recovery from the plague and
confirmed health instilled into her a firm belief that I was now secure
from this dread enemy. She told me that she was sure she should
recover. That she had a presentiment, that the tide of calamity which
deluged our unhappy race had now turned. That the remnant would be
preserved, and among them the dear objects of her tender affection; and
that in some selected spot we should wear out our lives together in
pleasant society. “Do not let my state of feebleness deceive you,” she
said; “I feel that I am better; there is a quick life within me, and a
spirit of anticipation that assures me, that I shall continue long to
make a part of this world. I shall throw off this degrading weakness of
body, which infects even my mind with debility, and I shall enter again
on the performance of my duties. I was sorry to leave Windsor: but now
I am weaned from this local attachment; I am content to remove to a
mild climate, which will complete my recovery. Trust me, dearest, I
shall neither leave you, nor my brother, nor these dear children; my
firm determination to remain with you to the last, and to continue to
contribute to your happiness and welfare, would keep me alive, even if
grim death were nearer at hand than he really is.”

I was only half re-assured by these expressions; I could not believe
that the over-quick flow of her blood was a sign of health, or that her
burning cheeks denoted convalescence. But I had no fears of an
immediate catastrophe; nay, I persuaded myself that she would
ultimately recover. And thus cheerfulness reigned in our little
society. Idris conversed with animation on a thousand topics. Her chief
desire was to lead our thoughts from melancholy reflections; so she
drew charming pictures of a tranquil solitude, of a beauteous retreat,
of the simple manners of our little tribe, and of the patriarchal
brotherhood of love, which would survive the ruins of the populous
nations which had lately existed. We shut out from our thoughts the
present, and withdrew our eyes from the dreary landscape we traversed.
Winter reigned in all its gloom. The leafless trees lay without motion
against the dun sky; the forms of frost, mimicking the foliage of
summer, strewed the ground; the paths were overgrown; the unploughed
cornfields were patched with grass and weeds; the sheep congregated at
the threshold of the cottage, the horned ox thrust his head from the
window. The wind was bleak, and frequent sleet or snow-storms, added to
the melancholy appearance wintry nature assumed.

We arrived at Rochester, and an accident caused us to be detained there
a day. During that time, a circumstance occurred that changed our
plans, and which, alas! in its result changed the eternal course of
events, turning me from the pleasant new sprung hope I enjoyed, to an
obscure and gloomy desert. But I must give some little explanation
before I proceed with the final cause of our temporary alteration of
plan, and refer again to those times when man walked the earth
fearless, before Plague had become Queen of the World.

There resided a family in the neighbourhood of Windsor, of very humble
pretensions, but which had been an object of interest to us on account
of one of the persons of whom it was composed. The family of the
Claytons had known better days; but, after a series of reverses, the
father died a bankrupt, and the mother heartbroken, and a confirmed
invalid, retired with her five children to a little cottage between
Eton and Salt Hill. The eldest of these children, who was thirteen
years old, seemed at once from the influence of adversity, to acquire
the sagacity and principle belonging to a more mature age. Her mother
grew worse and worse in health, but Lucy attended on her, and was as a
tender parent to her younger brothers and sisters, and in the meantime
shewed herself so good-humoured, social, and benevolent, that she was
beloved as well as honoured, in her little neighbourhood.

Lucy was besides extremely pretty; so when she grew to be sixteen, it
was to be supposed, notwithstanding her poverty, that she should have
admirers. One of these was the son of a country-curate; he was a
generous, frank-hearted youth, with an ardent love of knowledge, and no
mean acquirements. Though Lucy was untaught, her mother’s conversation
and manners gave her a taste for refinements superior to her present
situation. She loved the youth even without knowing it, except that in
any difficulty she naturally turned to him for aid, and awoke with a
lighter heart every Sunday, because she knew that she would be met and
accompanied by him in her evening walk with her sisters. She had
another admirer, one of the head-waiters at the inn at Salt Hill. He
also was not without pretensions to urbane superiority, such as he
learnt from gentlemen’s servants and waiting-maids, who initiating him
in all the slang of high life below stairs, rendered his arrogant
temper ten times more intrusive. Lucy did not disclaim him—she was
incapable of that feeling; but she was sorry when she saw him approach,
and quietly resisted all his endeavours to establish an intimacy. The
fellow soon discovered that his rival was preferred to him; and this
changed what was at first a chance admiration into a passion, whose
main springs were envy, and a base desire to deprive his competitor of
the advantage he enjoyed over himself.

Poor Lucy’s sad story was but a common one. Her lover’s father died;
and he was left destitute. He accepted the offer of a gentleman to go
to India with him, feeling secure that he should soon acquire an
independence, and return to claim the hand of his beloved. He became
involved in the war carried on there, was taken prisoner, and years
elapsed before tidings of his existence were received in his native
land. In the meantime disastrous poverty came on Lucy. Her little
cottage, which stood looking from its trellice, covered with woodbine
and jessamine, was burnt down; and the whole of their little property
was included in the destruction. Whither betake them? By what exertion
of industry could Lucy procure them another abode? Her mother nearly
bed-rid, could not survive any extreme of famine-struck poverty. At
this time her other admirer stept forward, and renewed his offer of
marriage. He had saved money, and was going to set up a little inn at
Datchet. There was nothing alluring to Lucy in this offer, except the
home it secured to her mother; and she felt more sure of this, since
she was struck by the apparent generosity which occasioned the present
offer. She accepted it; thus sacrificing herself for the comfort and
welfare of her parent.

It was some years after her marriage that we became acquainted with
her. The accident of a storm caused us to take refuge in the inn, where
we witnessed the brutal and quarrelsome behaviour of her husband, and
her patient endurance. Her lot was not a fortunate one. Her first lover
had returned with the hope of making her his own, and met her by
accident, for the first time, as the mistress of his country inn, and
the wife of another. He withdrew despairingly to foreign parts; nothing
went well with him; at last he enlisted, and came back again wounded
and sick, and yet Lucy was debarred from nursing him. Her husband’s
brutal disposition was aggravated by his yielding to the many
temptations held out by his situation, and the consequent
disarrangement of his affairs. Fortunately she had no children; but her
heart was bound up in her brothers and sisters, and these his avarice
and ill temper soon drove from the house; they were dispersed about the
country, earning their livelihood with toil and care. He even shewed an
inclination to get rid of her mother—but Lucy was firm here—she had
sacrificed herself for her; she lived for her —she would not part with
her—if the mother went, she would also go beg bread for her, die with
her, but never desert her. The presence of Lucy was too necessary in
keeping up the order of the house, and in preventing the whole
establishment from going to wreck, for him to permit her to leave him.
He yielded the point; but in all accesses of anger, or in his drunken
fits, he recurred to the old topic, and stung poor Lucy’s heart by
opprobrious epithets bestowed on her parent.

A passion however, if it be wholly pure, entire, and reciprocal, brings
with it its own solace. Lucy was truly, and from the depth of heart,
devoted to her mother; the sole end she proposed to herself in life,
was the comfort and preservation of this parent. Though she grieved for
the result, yet she did not repent of her marriage, even when her lover
returned to bestow competence on her. Three years had intervened, and
how, in their pennyless state, could her mother have existed during
this time? This excellent woman was worthy of her child’s devotion. A
perfect confidence and friendship existed between them; besides, she
was by no means illiterate; and Lucy, whose mind had been in some
degree cultivated by her former lover, now found in her the only person
who could understand and appreciate her. Thus, though suffering, she
was by no means desolate, and when, during fine summer days, she led
her mother into the flowery and shady lanes near their abode, a gleam
of unmixed joy enlightened her countenance; she saw that her parent was
happy, and she knew that this happiness was of her sole creating.

Meanwhile her husband’s affairs grew more and more involved; ruin was
near at hand, and she was about to lose the fruit of all her labours,
when pestilence came to change the aspect of the world. Her husband
reaped benefit from the universal misery; but, as the disaster
encreased, the spirit of lawlessness seized him; he deserted his home
to revel in the luxuries promised him in London, and found there a
grave. Her former lover had been one of the first victims of the
disease. But Lucy continued to live for and in her mother. Her courage
only failed when she dreaded peril for her parent, or feared that death
might prevent her from performing those duties to which she was
unalterably devoted.

When we had quitted Windsor for London, as the previous step to our
final emigration, we visited Lucy, and arranged with her the plan of
her own and her mother’s removal. Lucy was sorry at the necessity which
forced her to quit her native lanes and village, and to drag an infirm
parent from her comforts at home, to the homeless waste of depopulate
earth; but she was too well disciplined by adversity, and of too sweet
a temper, to indulge in repinings at what was inevitable.

Subsequent circumstances, my illness and that of Idris, drove her from
our remembrance; and we called her to mind at last, only to conclude
that she made one of the few who came from Windsor to join the
emigrants, and that she was already in Paris. When we arrived at
Rochester therefore, we were surprised to receive, by a man just come
from Slough, a letter from this exemplary sufferer. His account was,
that, journeying from his home, and passing through Datchet, he was
surprised to see smoke issue from the chimney of the inn, and supposing
that he should find comrades for his journey assembled there, he
knocked and was admitted. There was no one in the house but Lucy, and
her mother; the latter had been deprived of the use of her limbs by an
attack of rheumatism, and so, one by one, all the remaining inhabitants
of the country set forward, leaving them alone. Lucy intreated the man
to stay with her; in a week or two her mother would be better, and they
would then set out; but they must perish, if they were left thus
helpless and forlorn. The man said, that his wife and children were
already among the emigrants, and it was therefore, according to his
notion, impossible for him to remain. Lucy, as a last resource, gave
him a letter for Idris, to be delivered to her wherever he should meet
us. This commission at least he fulfilled, and Idris received with
emotion the following letter:—

“HONOURED LADY,


“I am sure that you will remember and pity me, and I dare hope that you
will assist me; what other hope have I? Pardon my manner of writing, I
am so bewildered. A month ago my dear mother was deprived of the use of
her limbs. She is already better, and in another month would I am sure
be able to travel, in the way you were so kind as to say you would
arrange for us. But now everybody is gone—everybody—as they went away,
each said, that perhaps my mother would be better, before we were quite
deserted. But three days ago I went to Samuel Woods, who, on account of
his new-born child, remained to the last; and there being a large
family of them, I thought I could persuade them to wait a little longer
for us; but I found the house deserted. I have not seen a soul since,
till this good man came. —What will become of us? My mother does not
know our state; she is so ill, that I have hidden it from her.

“Will you not send some one to us? I am sure we must perish miserably
as we are. If I were to try to move my mother now, she would die on the
road; and if, when she gets better, I were able, I cannot guess how, to
find out the roads, and get on so many many miles to the sea, you would
all be in France, and the great ocean would be between us, which is so
terrible even to sailors. What would it be to me, a woman, who never
saw it? We should be imprisoned by it in this country, all, all alone,
with no help; better die where we are. I can hardly write—I cannot stop
my tears—it is not for myself; I could put my trust in God; and let the
worst come, I think I could bear it, if I were alone. But my mother, my
sick, my dear, dear mother, who never, since I was born, spoke a harsh
word to me, who has been patient in many sufferings; pity her, dear
Lady, she must die a miserable death if you do not pity her. People
speak carelessly of her, because she is old and infirm, as if we must
not all, if we are spared, become so; and then, when the young are old
themselves, they will think that they ought to be taken care of. It is
very silly of me to write in this way to you; but, when I hear her
trying not to groan, and see her look smiling on me to comfort me, when
I know she is in pain; and when I think that she does not know the
worst, but she soon must; and then she will not complain; but I shall
sit guessing at all that she is dwelling upon, of famine and misery—I
feel as if my heart must break, and I do not know what I say or do; my
mother—mother for whom I have borne much, God preserve you from this
fate! Preserve her, Lady, and He will bless you; and I, poor miserable
creature as I am, will thank you and pray for you while I live.

“Your unhappy and dutiful servant,
LUCY MARTIN.”
“_Dec_. 30_th_, 2097.


This letter deeply affected Idris, and she instantly proposed, that we
should return to Datchet, to assist Lucy and her mother. I said that I
would without delay set out for that place, but entreated her to join
her brother, and there await my return with the children. But Idris was
in high spirits, and full of hope. She declared that she could not
consent even to a temporary separation from me, but that there was no
need of this, the motion of the carriage did her good, and the distance
was too trifling to be considered. We could dispatch messengers to
Adrian, to inform him of our deviation from the original plan. She
spoke with vivacity, and drew a picture after her own dear heart, of
the pleasure we should bestow upon Lucy, and declared, if I went, she
must accompany me, and that she should very much dislike to entrust the
charge of rescuing them to others, who might fulfil it with coldness or
inhumanity. Lucy’s life had been one act of devotion and virtue; let
her now reap the small reward of finding her excellence appreciated,
and her necessity assisted, by those whom she respected and honoured.

These, and many other arguments, were urged with gentle pertinacity,
and the ardour of a wish to do all the good in her power, by her whose
simple expression of a desire and slightest request had ever been a law
with me. I, of course, consented, the moment that I saw that she had
set her heart upon this step. We sent half our attendant troop on to
Adrian; and with the other half our carriage took a retrograde course
back to Windsor.

I wonder now how I could be so blind and senseless, as thus to risk the
safety of Idris; for, if I had eyes, surely I could see the sure,
though deceitful, advance of death in her burning cheek and encreasing
weakness. But she said she was better; and I believed her. Extinction
could not be near a being, whose vivacity and intelligence hourly
encreased, and whose frame was endowed with an intense, and I fondly
thought, a strong and permanent spirit of life. Who, after a great
disaster, has not looked back with wonder at his inconceivable
obtuseness of understanding, that could not perceive the many minute
threads with which fate weaves the inextricable net of our destinies,
until he is inmeshed completely in it?

The cross roads which we now entered upon, were even in a worse state
than the long neglected high-ways; and the inconvenience seemed to
menace the perishing frame of Idris with destruction. Passing through
Dartford, we arrived at Hampton on the second day. Even in this short
interval my beloved companion grew sensibly worse in health, though her
spirits were still light, and she cheered my growing anxiety with gay
sallies; sometimes the thought pierced my brain—Is she dying?—as I saw
her fair fleshless hand rest on mine, or observed the feebleness with
which she performed the accustomed acts of life. I drove away the idea,
as if it had been suggested by insanity; but it occurred again and
again, only to be dispelled by the continued liveliness of her manner.

About mid-day, after quitting Hampton, our carriage broke down: the
shock caused Idris to faint, but on her reviving no other ill
consequence ensued; our party of attendants had as usual gone on before
us, and our coachman went in search of another vehicle, our former one
being rendered by this accident unfit for service. The only place near
us was a poor village, in which he found a kind of caravan, able to
hold four people, but it was clumsy and ill hung; besides this he found
a very excellent cabriolet: our plan was soon arranged; I would drive
Idris in the latter; while the children were conveyed by the servant in
the former. But these arrangements cost time; we had agreed to proceed
that night to Windsor, and thither our purveyors had gone: we should
find considerable difficulty in getting accommodation, before we
reached this place; after all, the distance was only ten miles; my
horse was a good one; I would go forward at a good pace with Idris,
leaving the children to follow at a rate more consonant to the uses of
their cumberous machine.

Evening closed in quickly, far more quickly than I was prepared to
expect. At the going down of the sun it began to snow heavily. I
attempted in vain to defend my beloved companion from the storm; the
wind drove the snow in our faces; and it lay so high on the ground,
that we made but small way; while the night was so dark, that but for
the white covering on the ground we should not have been able to see a
yard before us. We had left our accompanying caravan far behind us; and
now I perceived that the storm had made me unconsciously deviate from
my intended route. I had gone some miles out of my way. My knowledge of
the country enabled me to regain the right road; but, instead of going,
as at first agreed upon, by a cross road through Stanwell to Datchet, I
was obliged to take the way of Egham and Bishopgate. It was certain
therefore that I should not be rejoined by the other vehicle, that I
should not meet a single fellow-creature till we arrived at Windsor.

The back of our carriage was drawn up, and I hung a pelisse before it,
thus to curtain the beloved sufferer from the pelting sleet. She leaned
on my shoulder, growing every moment more languid and feeble; at first
she replied to my words of cheer with affectionate thanks; but by
degrees she sunk into silence; her head lay heavily upon me; I only
knew that she lived by her irregular breathing and frequent sighs. For
a moment I resolved to stop, and, opposing the back of the cabriolet to
the force of the tempest, to expect morning as well as I might. But the
wind was bleak and piercing, while the occasional shudderings of my
poor Idris, and the intense cold I felt myself, demonstrated that this
would be a dangerous experiment. At length methought she slept—fatal
sleep, induced by frost: at this moment I saw the heavy outline of a
cottage traced on the dark horizon close to us: “Dearest love,” I said,
“support yourself but one moment, and we shall have shelter; let us
stop here, that I may open the door of this blessed dwelling.”

As I spoke, my heart was transported, and my senses swam with excessive
delight and thankfulness; I placed the head of Idris against the
carriage, and, leaping out, scrambled through the snow to the cottage,
whose door was open. I had apparatus about me for procuring light, and
that shewed me a comfortable room, with a pile of wood in one corner,
and no appearance of disorder, except that, the door having been left
partly open, the snow, drifting in, had blocked up the threshold. I
returned to the carriage, and the sudden change from light to darkness
at first blinded me. When I recovered my sight—eternal God of this
lawless world! O supreme Death! I will not disturb thy silent reign, or
mar my tale with fruitless exclamations of horror—I saw Idris, who had
fallen from the seat to the bottom of the carriage; her head, its long
hair pendent, with one arm, hung over the side.—Struck by a spasm of
horror, I lifted her up; her heart was pulseless, her faded lips
unfanned by the slightest breath.

I carried her into the cottage; I placed her on the bed. Lighting a
fire, I chafed her stiffening limbs; for two long hours I sought to
restore departed life; and, when hope was as dead as my beloved, I
closed with trembling hands her glazed eyes. I did not doubt what I
should now do. In the confusion attendant on my illness, the task of
interring our darling Alfred had devolved on his grandmother, the
Ex-Queen, and she, true to her ruling passion, had caused him to be
carried to Windsor, and buried in the family vault, in St. George’s
Chapel. I must proceed to Windsor, to calm the anxiety of Clara, who
would wait anxiously for us—yet I would fain spare her the
heart-breaking spectacle of Idris, brought in by me lifeless from the
journey. So first I would place my beloved beside her child in the
vault, and then seek the poor children who would be expecting me.

I lighted the lamps of my carriage; I wrapt her in furs, and placed her
along the seat; then taking the reins, made the horses go forward. We
proceeded through the snow, which lay in masses impeding the way, while
the descending flakes, driving against me with redoubled fury, blinded
me. The pain occasioned by the angry elements, and the cold iron of the
shafts of frost which buffetted me, and entered my aching flesh, were a
relief to me; blunting my mental suffering. The horses staggered on,
and the reins hung loosely in my hands. I often thought I would lay my
head close to the sweet, cold face of my lost angel, and thus resign
myself to conquering torpor. Yet I must not leave her a prey to the
fowls of the air; but, in pursuance of my determination place her in
the tomb of her forefathers, where a merciful God might permit me to
rest also.

The road we passed through Egham was familiar to me; but the wind and
snow caused the horses to drag their load slowly and heavily. Suddenly
the wind veered from south-west to west, and then again to north-west.
As Sampson with tug and strain stirred from their bases the columns
that supported the Philistine temple, so did the gale shake the dense
vapours propped on the horizon, while the massy dome of clouds fell to
the south, disclosing through the scattered web the clear empyrean, and
the little stars, which were set at an immeasurable distance in the
crystalline fields, showered their small rays on the glittering snow.
Even the horses were cheered, and moved on with renovated strength. We
entered the forest at Bishopgate, and at the end of the Long Walk I saw
the Castle, “the proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the majesty of
proportion, girt with the double belt of its kindred and coeval
towers.” I looked with reverence on a structure, ancient almost as the
rock on which it stood, abode of kings, theme of admiration for the
wise. With greater reverence and, tearful affection I beheld it as the
asylum of the long lease of love I had enjoyed there with the
perishable, unmatchable treasure of dust, which now lay cold beside me.
Now indeed, I could have yielded to all the softness of my nature, and
wept; and, womanlike, have uttered bitter plaints; while the familiar
trees, the herds of living deer, the sward oft prest by her fairy-feet,
one by one with sad association presented themselves. The white gate at
the end of the Long Walk was wide open, and I rode up the empty town
through the first gate of the feudal tower; and now St. George’s
Chapel, with its blackened fretted sides, was right before me. I halted
at its door, which was open; I entered, and placed my lighted lamp on
the altar; then I returned, and with tender caution I bore Idris up the
aisle into the chancel, and laid her softly down on the carpet which
covered the step leading to the communion table. The banners of the
knights of the garter, and their half drawn swords, were hung in vain
emblazonry above the stalls. The banner of her family hung there, still
surmounted by its regal crown. Farewell to the glory and heraldry of
England!—I turned from such vanity with a slight feeling of wonder, at
how mankind could have ever been interested in such things. I bent over
the lifeless corpse of my beloved; and, while looking on her uncovered
face, the features already contracted by the rigidity of death, I felt
as if all the visible universe had grown as soulless, inane, and
comfortless as the clay-cold image beneath me. I felt for a moment the
intolerable sense of struggle with, and detestation for, the laws which
govern the world; till the calm still visible on the face of my dead
love recalled me to a more soothing tone of mind, and I proceeded to
fulfil the last office that could now be paid her. For her I could not
lament, so much I envied her enjoyment of “the sad immunities of the
grave.”

The vault had been lately opened to place our Alfred therein. The
ceremony customary in these latter days had been cursorily performed,
and the pavement of the chapel, which was its entrance, having been
removed, had not been replaced. I descended the steps, and walked
through the long passage to the large vault which contained the kindred
dust of my Idris. I distinguished the small coffin of my babe. With
hasty, trembling hands I constructed a bier beside it, spreading it
with the furs and Indian shawls, which had wrapt Idris in her journey
thither. I lighted the glimmering lamp, which flickered in this damp
abode of the dead; then I bore my lost one to her last bed, decently
composing her limbs, and covering them with a mantle, veiling all
except her face, which remained lovely and placid. She appeared to rest
like one over-wearied, her beauteous eyes steeped in sweet slumber.
Yet, so it was not—she was dead! How intensely I then longed to lie
down beside her, to gaze till death should gather me to the same
repose.

But death does not come at the bidding of the miserable. I had lately
recovered from mortal illness, and my blood had never flowed with such
an even current, nor had my limbs ever been so instinct with quick
life, as now. I felt that my death must be voluntary. Yet what more
natural than famine, as I watched in this chamber of mortality, placed
in a world of the dead, beside the lost hope of my life? Meanwhile as I
looked on her, the features, which bore a sisterly resemblance to
Adrian, brought my thoughts back again to the living, to this dear
friend, to Clara, and to Evelyn, who were probably now in Windsor,
waiting anxiously for our arrival.

Methought I heard a noise, a step in the far chapel, which was
re-echoed by its vaulted roof, and borne to me through the hollow
passages. Had Clara seen my carriage pass up the town, and did she seek
me here? I must save her at least from the horrible scene the vault
presented. I sprung up the steps, and then saw a female figure, bent
with age, and clad in long mourning robes, advance through the dusky
chapel, supported by a slender cane, yet tottering even with this
support. She heard me, and looked up; the lamp I held illuminated my
figure, and the moon-beams, struggling through the painted glass, fell
upon her face, wrinkled and gaunt, yet with a piercing eye and
commanding brow—I recognized the Countess of Windsor. With a hollow
voice she asked, “Where is the princess?”

I pointed to the torn up pavement: she walked to the spot, and looked
down into the palpable darkness; for the vault was too distant for the
rays of the small lamp I had left there to be discernible.

“Your light,” she said. I gave it her; and she regarded the now
visible, but precipitous steps, as if calculating her capacity to
descend. Instinctively I made a silent offer of my assistance. She
motioned me away with a look of scorn, saying in an harsh voice, as she
pointed downwards, “There at least I may have her undisturbed.”

She walked deliberately down, while I, overcome, miserable beyond
words, or tears, or groans, threw myself on the pavement near—the
stiffening form of Idris was before me, the death-struck countenance
hushed in eternal repose beneath. That was to me the end of all! The
day before, I had figured to my self various adventures, and communion
with my friends in after time—now I had leapt the interval, and reached
the utmost edge and bourne of life. Thus wrapt in gloom, enclosed,
walled up, vaulted over by the omnipotent present, I was startled by
the sound of feet on the steps of the tomb, and I remembered her whom I
had utterly forgotten, my angry visitant; her tall form slowly rose
upwards from the vault, a living statue, instinct with hate, and human,
passionate strife: she seemed to me as having reached the pavement of
the aisle; she stood motionless, seeking with her eyes alone, some
desired object—till, perceiving me close to her, she placed her
wrinkled hand on my arm, exclaiming with tremulous accents, “Lionel
Verney, my son!” This name, applied at such a moment by my angel’s
mother, instilled into me more respect than I had ever before felt for
this disdainful lady. I bowed my head, and kissed her shrivelled hand,
and, remarking that she trembled violently, supported her to the end of
the chancel, where she sat on the steps that led to the regal stall.
She suffered herself to be led, and still holding my hand, she leaned
her head back against the stall, while the moon beams, tinged with
various colours by the painted glass, fell on her glistening eyes;
aware of her weakness, again calling to mind her long cherished
dignity, she dashed the tears away; yet they fell fast, as she said,
for excuse, “She is so beautiful and placid, even in death. No harsh
feeling ever clouded her serene brow; how did I treat her? wounding her
gentle heart with savage coldness; I had no compassion on her in past
years, does she forgive me now? Little, little does it boot to talk of
repentance and forgiveness to the dead, had I during her life once
consulted her gentle wishes, and curbed my rugged nature to do her
pleasure, I should not feel thus.”

Idris and her mother were unlike in person. The dark hair, deep-set
black eyes, and prominent features of the Ex-Queen were in entire
contrast to the golden tresses, the full blue orbs, and the soft lines
and contour of her daughter’s countenance. Yet, in latter days, illness
had taken from my poor girl the full outline of her face, and reduced
it to the inflexible shape of the bone beneath. In the form of her
brow, in her oval chin, there was to be found a resemblance to her
mother; nay in some moods, their gestures were not unlike; nor, having
lived so long together, was this wonderful.

There is a magic power in resemblance. When one we love dies, we hope
to see them in another state, and half expect that the agency of mind
will inform its new garb in imitation of its decayed earthly vesture.
But these are ideas of the mind only. We know that the instrument is
shivered, the sensible image lies in miserable fragments, dissolved to
dusty nothingness; a look, a gesture, or a fashioning of the limbs
similar to the dead in a living person, touches a thrilling chord,
whose sacred harmony is felt in the heart’s dearest recess. Strangely
moved, prostrate before this spectral image, and enslaved by the force
of blood manifested in likeness of look and movement, I remained
trembling in the presence of the harsh, proud, and till now unloved
mother of Idris.

Poor, mistaken woman! in her tenderest mood before, she had cherished
the idea, that a word, a look of reconciliation from her, would be
received with joy, and repay long years of severity. Now that the time
was gone for the exercise of such power, she fell at once upon the
thorny truth of things, and felt that neither smile nor caress could
penetrate to the unconscious state, or influence the happiness of her
who lay in the vault beneath. This conviction, together with the
remembrance of soft replies to bitter speeches, of gentle looks
repaying angry glances; the perception of the falsehood, paltryness and
futility of her cherished dreams of birth and power; the overpowering
knowledge, that love and life were the true emperors of our mortal
state; all, as a tide, rose, and filled her soul with stormy and
bewildering confusion. It fell to my lot, to come as the influential
power, to allay the fierce tossing of these tumultuous waves. I spoke
to her; I led her to reflect how happy Idris had really been, and how
her virtues and numerous excellencies had found scope and estimation in
her past career. I praised her, the idol of my heart’s dear worship,
the admired type of feminine perfection. With ardent and overflowing
eloquence, I relieved my heart from its burthen, and awoke to the sense
of a new pleasure in life, as I poured forth the funeral eulogy. Then I
referred to Adrian, her loved brother, and to her surviving child. I
declared, which I had before almost forgotten, what my duties were with
regard to these valued portions of herself, and bade the melancholy
repentant mother reflect, how she could best expiate unkindness towards
the dead, by redoubled love of the survivors. Consoling her, my own
sorrows were assuaged; my sincerity won her entire conviction.

She turned to me. The hard, inflexible, persecuting woman, turned with
a mild expression of face, and said, “If our beloved angel sees us now,
it will delight her to find that I do you even tardy justice. You were
worthy of her; and from my heart I am glad that you won her away from
me. Pardon, my son, the many wrongs I have done you; forget my bitter
words and unkind treatment—take me, and govern me as you will.”

I seized this docile moment to propose our departure from the church.
“First,” she said, “let us replace the pavement above the vault.”

We drew near to it; “Shall we look on her again?” I asked.

“I cannot,” she replied, “and, I pray you, neither do you. We need not
torture ourselves by gazing on the soulless body, while her living
spirit is buried quick in our hearts, and her surpassing loveliness is
so deeply carved there, that sleeping or waking she must ever be
present to us.”

For a few moments, we bent in solemn silence over the open vault. I
consecrated my future life, to the embalming of her dear memory; I
vowed to serve her brother and her child till death. The convulsive sob
of my companion made me break off my internal orisons. I next dragged
the stones over the entrance of the tomb, and closed the gulph that
contained the life of my life. Then, supporting my decrepid
fellow-mourner, we slowly left the chapel. I felt, as I stepped into
the open air, as if I had quitted an happy nest of repose, for a dreary
wilderness, a tortuous path, a bitter, joyless, hopeless pilgrimage.




CHAPTER IV.


Our escort had been directed to prepare our abode for the night at the
inn, opposite the ascent to the Castle. We could not again visit the
halls and familiar chambers of our home, on a mere visit. We had
already left for ever the glades of Windsor, and all of coppice,
flowery hedgerow, and murmuring stream, which gave shape and intensity
to the love of our country, and the almost superstitious attachment
with which we regarded native England. It had been our intention to
have called at Lucy’s dwelling in Datchet, and to have re-assured her
with promises of aid and protection before we repaired to our quarters
for the night. Now, as the Countess of Windsor and I turned down the
steep hill that led from the Castle, we saw the children, who had just
stopped in their caravan, at the inn-door. They had passed through
Datchet without halting. I dreaded to meet them, and to be the bearer
of my tragic story, so while they were still occupied in the hurry of
arrival, I suddenly left them, and through the snow and clear
moon-light air, hastened along the well known road to Datchet.

Well known indeed it was. Each cottage stood on its accustomed site,
each tree wore its familiar appearance. Habit had graven uneraseably on
my memory, every turn and change of object on the road. At a short
distance beyond the Little Park, was an elm half blown down by a storm,
some ten years ago; and still, with leafless snow-laden branches, it
stretched across the pathway, which wound through a meadow, beside a
shallow brook, whose brawling was silenced by frost—that stile, that
white gate, that hollow oak tree, which doubtless once belonged to the
forest, and which now shewed in the moonlight its gaping rent; to whose
fanciful appearance, tricked out by the dusk into a resemblance of the
human form, the children had given the name of Falstaff;—all these
objects were as well known to me as the cold hearth of my deserted
home, and every moss-grown wall and plot of orchard ground, alike as
twin lambs are to each other in a stranger’s eye, yet to my accustomed
gaze bore differences, distinction, and a name. England remained,
though England was dead—it was the ghost of merry England that I
beheld, under those greenwood shade passing generations had sported in
security and ease. To this painful recognition of familiar places, was
added a feeling experienced by all, understood by none—a feeling as if
in some state, less visionary than a dream, in some past real
existence, I had seen all I saw, with precisely the same feelings as I
now beheld them—as if all my sensations were a duplex mirror of a
former revelation. To get rid of this oppressive sense I strove to
imagine change in this tranquil spot—this augmented my mood, by causing
me to bestow more attention on the objects which occasioned me pain.

I reached Datchet and Lucy’s humble abode—once noisy with Saturday
night revellers, or trim and neat on Sunday morning it had borne
testimony to the labours and orderly habits of the housewife. The snow
lay high about the door, as if it had remained unclosed for many days.

    “What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?”

I muttered to myself as I looked at the dark casements. At first I
thought I saw a light in one of them, but it proved to be merely the
refraction of the moon-beams, while the only sound was the crackling
branches as the breeze whirred the snow flakes from them—the moon
sailed high and unclouded in the interminable ether, while the shadow
of the cottage lay black on the garden behind. I entered this by the
open wicket, and anxiously examined each window. At length I detected a
ray of light struggling through a closed shutter in one of the upper
rooms—it was a novel feeling, alas! to look at any house and say there
dwells its usual inmate—the door of the house was merely on the latch:
so I entered and ascended the moon-lit staircase. The door of the
inhabited room was ajar: looking in, I saw Lucy sitting as at work at
the table on which the light stood; the implements of needlework were
about her, but her hand had fallen on her lap, and her eyes, fixed on
the ground, shewed by their vacancy that her thoughts wandered. Traces
of care and watching had diminished her former attractions—but her
simple dress and cap, her desponding attitude, and the single candle
that cast its light upon her, gave for a moment a picturesque grouping
to the whole. A fearful reality recalled me from the thought—a figure
lay stretched on the bed covered by a sheet—her mother was dead, and
Lucy, apart from all the world, deserted and alone, watched beside the
corpse during the weary night. I entered the room, and my unexpected
appearance at first drew a scream from the lone survivor of a dead
nation; but she recognised me, and recovered herself, with the quick
exercise of self-control habitual to her. “Did you not expect me?” I
asked, in that low voice which the presence of the dead makes us as it
were instinctively assume.

“You are very good,” replied she, “to have come yourself; I can never
thank you sufficiently; but it is too late.”

“Too late,” cried I, “what do you mean? It is not too late to take you
from this deserted place, and conduct you to—-”

My own loss, which I had forgotten as I spoke, now made me turn away,
while choking grief impeded my speech. I threw open the window, and
looked on the cold, waning, ghastly, misshaped circle on high, and the
chill white earth beneath—did the spirit of sweet Idris sail along the
moon-frozen crystal air?—No, no, a more genial atmosphere, a lovelier
habitation was surely hers!

I indulged in this meditation for a moment, and then again addressed
the mourner, who stood leaning against the bed with that expression of
resigned despair, of complete misery, and a patient sufferance of it,
which is far more touching than any of the insane ravings or wild
gesticulation of untamed sorrow. I desired to draw her from this spot;
but she opposed my wish. That class of persons whose imagination and
sensibility have never been taken out of the narrow circle immediately
in view, if they possess these qualities to any extent, are apt to pour
their influence into the very realities which appear to destroy them,
and to cling to these with double tenacity from not being able to
comprehend any thing beyond. Thus Lucy, in desert England, in a dead
world, wished to fulfil the usual ceremonies of the dead, such as were
customary to the English country people, when death was a rare
visitant, and gave us time to receive his dreaded usurpation with pomp
and circumstance—going forth in procession to deliver the keys of the
tomb into his conquering hand. She had already, alone as she was,
accomplished some of these, and the work on which I found her employed,
was her mother’s shroud. My heart sickened at such detail of woe, which
a female can endure, but which is more painful to the masculine spirit
than deadliest struggle, or throes of unutterable but transient agony.

This must not be, I told her; and then, as further inducement, I
communicated to her my recent loss, and gave her the idea that she must
come with me to take charge of the orphan children, whom the death of
Idris had deprived of a mother’s care. Lucy never resisted the call of
a duty, so she yielded, and closing the casements and doors with care,
she accompanied me back to Windsor. As we went she communicated to me
the occasion of her mother’s death. Either by some mischance she had
got sight of Lucy’s letter to Idris, or she had overheard her
conversation with the countryman who bore it; however it might be, she
obtained a knowledge of the appalling situation of herself and her
daughter, her aged frame could not sustain the anxiety and horror this
discovery instilled—she concealed her knowledge from Lucy, but brooded
over it through sleepless nights, till fever and delirium, swift
forerunners of death, disclosed the secret. Her life, which had long
been hovering on its extinction, now yielded at once to the united
effects of misery and sickness, and that same morning she had died.

After the tumultuous emotions of the day, I was glad to find on my
arrival at the inn that my companions had retired to rest. I gave Lucy
in charge to the Countess’s attendant, and then sought repose from my
various struggles and impatient regrets. For a few moments the events
of the day floated in disastrous pageant through my brain, till sleep
bathed it in forgetfulness; when morning dawned and I awoke, it seemed
as if my slumber had endured for years.

My companions had not shared my oblivion. Clara’s swollen eyes shewed
that she had passed the night in weeping. The Countess looked haggard
and wan. Her firm spirit had not found relief in tears, and she
suffered the more from all the painful retrospect and agonizing regret
that now occupied her. We departed from Windsor, as soon as the burial
rites had been performed for Lucy’s mother, and, urged on by an
impatient desire to change the scene, went forward towards Dover with
speed, our escort having gone before to provide horses; finding them
either in the warm stables they instinctively sought during the cold
weather, or standing shivering in the bleak fields ready to surrender
their liberty in exchange for offered corn.

During our ride the Countess recounted to me the extraordinary
circumstances which had brought her so strangely to my side in the
chancel of St. George’s chapel. When last she had taken leave of Idris,
as she looked anxiously on her faded person and pallid countenance, she
had suddenly been visited by a conviction that she saw her for the last
time. It was hard to part with her while under the dominion of this
sentiment, and for the last time she endeavoured to persuade her
daughter to commit herself to her nursing, permitting me to join
Adrian. Idris mildly refused, and thus they separated. The idea that
they should never again meet grew on the Countess’s mind, and haunted
her perpetually; a thousand times she had resolved to turn back and
join us, and was again and again restrained by the pride and anger of
which she was the slave. Proud of heart as she was, she bathed her
pillow with nightly tears, and through the day was subdued by nervous
agitation and expectation of the dreaded event, which she was wholly
incapable of curbing. She confessed that at this period her hatred of
me knew no bounds, since she considered me as the sole obstacle to the
fulfilment of her dearest wish, that of attending upon her daughter in
her last moments. She desired to express her fears to her son, and to
seek consolation from his sympathy with, or courage from his rejection
of, her auguries.

On the first day of her arrival at Dover she walked with him on the sea
beach, and with the timidity characteristic of passionate and
exaggerated feeling was by degrees bringing the conversation to the
desired point, when she could communicate her fears to him, when the
messenger who bore my letter announcing our temporary return to
Windsor, came riding down to them. He gave some oral account of how he
had left us, and added, that notwithstanding the cheerfulness and good
courage of Lady Idris, he was afraid that she would hardly reach
Windsor alive. “True,” said the Countess, “your fears are just, she is
about to expire!”

As she spoke, her eyes were fixed on a tomblike hollow of the cliff,
and she saw, she averred the same to me with solemnity, Idris pacing
slowly towards this cave. She was turned from her, her head was bent
down, her white dress was such as she was accustomed to wear, except
that a thin crape-like veil covered her golden tresses, and concealed
her as a dim transparent mist. She looked dejected, as docilely
yielding to a commanding power; she submissively entered, and was lost
in the dark recess.

“Were I subject to visionary moods,” said the venerable lady, as she
continued her narrative, “I might doubt my eyes, and condemn my
credulity; but reality is the world I live in, and what I saw I doubt
not had existence beyond myself. From that moment I could not rest; it
was worth my existence to see her once again before she died; I knew
that I should not accomplish this, yet I must endeavour. I immediately
departed for Windsor; and, though I was assured that we travelled
speedily, it seemed to me that our progress was snail-like, and that
delays were created solely for my annoyance. Still I accused you, and
heaped on your head the fiery ashes of my burning impatience. It was no
disappointment, though an agonizing pang, when you pointed to her last
abode; and words would ill express the abhorrence I that moment felt
towards you, the triumphant impediment to my dearest wishes. I saw her,
and anger, and hate, and injustice died at her bier, giving place at
their departure to a remorse (Great God, that I should feel it!) which
must last while memory and feeling endure.”

To medicine such remorse, to prevent awakening love and new-born
mildness from producing the same bitter fruit that hate and harshness
had done, I devoted all my endeavours to soothe the venerable penitent.
Our party was a melancholy one; each was possessed by regret for what
was remediless; for the absence of his mother shadowed even the infant
gaiety of Evelyn. Added to this was the prospect of the uncertain
future. Before the final accomplishment of any great voluntary change
the mind vacillates, now soothing itself by fervent expectation, now
recoiling from obstacles which seem never to have presented themselves
before with so frightful an aspect. An involuntary tremor ran through
me when I thought that in another day we might have crossed the watery
barrier, and have set forward on that hopeless, interminable, sad
wandering, which but a short time before I regarded as the only relief
to sorrow that our situation afforded.

Our approach to Dover was announced by the loud roarings of the wintry
sea. They were borne miles inland by the sound-laden blast, and by
their unaccustomed uproar, imparted a feeling of insecurity and peril
to our stable abode. At first we hardly permitted ourselves to think
that any unusual eruption of nature caused this tremendous war of air
and water, but rather fancied that we merely listened to what we had
heard a thousand times before, when we had watched the flocks of
fleece-crowned waves, driven by the winds, come to lament and die on
the barren sands and pointed rocks. But we found upon advancing
farther, that Dover was overflowed— many of the houses were overthrown
by the surges which filled the streets, and with hideous brawlings
sometimes retreated leaving the pavement of the town bare, till again
hurried forward by the influx of ocean, they returned with
thunder-sound to their usurped station.

Hardly less disturbed than the tempestuous world of waters was the
assembly of human beings, that from the cliff fearfully watched its
ravings. On the morning of the arrival of the emigrants under the
conduct of Adrian, the sea had been serene and glassy, the slight
ripples refracted the sunbeams, which shed their radiance through the
clear blue frosty air. This placid appearance of nature was hailed as a
good augury for the voyage, and the chief immediately repaired to the
harbour to examine two steamboats which were moored there. On the
following midnight, when all were at rest, a frightful storm of wind
and clattering rain and hail first disturbed them, and the voice of one
shrieking in the streets, that the sleepers must awake or they would be
drowned; and when they rushed out, half clothed, to discover the
meaning of this alarm, they found that the tide, rising above every
mark, was rushing into the town. They ascended the cliff, but the
darkness permitted only the white crest of waves to be seen, while the
roaring wind mingled its howlings in dire accord with the wild surges.
The awful hour of night, the utter inexperience of many who had never
seen the sea before, the wailing of women and cries of children added
to the horror of the tumult. All the following day the same scene
continued. When the tide ebbed, the town was left dry; but on its flow,
it rose even higher than on the preceding night. The vast ships that
lay rotting in the roads were whirled from their anchorage, and driven
and jammed against the cliff, the vessels in the harbour were flung on
land like sea-weed, and there battered to pieces by the breakers. The
waves dashed against the cliff, which if in any place it had been
before loosened, now gave way, and the affrighted crowd saw vast
fragments of the near earth fall with crash and roar into the deep.
This sight operated differently on different persons. The greater part
thought it a judgment of God, to prevent or punish our emigration from
our native land. Many were doubly eager to quit a nook of ground now
become their prison, which appeared unable to resist the inroads of
ocean’s giant waves.

When we arrived at Dover, after a fatiguing day’s journey, we all
required rest and sleep; but the scene acting around us soon drove away
such ideas. We were drawn, along with the greater part of our
companions, to the edge of the cliff, there to listen to and make a
thousand conjectures. A fog narrowed our horizon to about a quarter of
a mile, and the misty veil, cold and dense, enveloped sky and sea in
equal obscurity. What added to our inquietude was the circumstance that
two-thirds of our original number were now waiting for us in Paris, and
clinging, as we now did most painfully, to any addition to our
melancholy remnant, this division, with the tameless impassable ocean
between, struck us with affright. At length, after loitering for
several hours on the cliff, we retired to Dover Castle, whose roof
sheltered all who breathed the English air, and sought the sleep
necessary to restore strength and courage to our worn frames and
languid spirits.

Early in the morning Adrian brought me the welcome intelligence that
the wind had changed: it had been south-west; it was now north-east.
The sky was stripped bare of clouds by the increasing gale, while the
tide at its ebb seceded entirely from the town. The change of wind
rather increased the fury of the sea, but it altered its late dusky hue
to a bright green; and in spite of its unmitigated clamour, its more
cheerful appearance instilled hope and pleasure. All day we watched the
ranging of the mountainous waves, and towards sunset a desire to
decypher the promise for the morrow at its setting, made us all gather
with one accord on the edge of the cliff. When the mighty luminary
approached within a few degrees of the tempest-tossed horizon,
suddenly, a wonder! three other suns, alike burning and brilliant,
rushed from various quarters of the heavens towards the great orb; they
whirled round it. The glare of light was intense to our dazzled eyes;
the sun itself seemed to join in the dance, while the sea burned like a
furnace, like all Vesuvius a-light, with flowing lava beneath. The
horses broke loose from their stalls in terror—a herd of cattle, panic
struck, raced down to the brink of the cliff, and blinded by light,
plunged down with frightful yells in the waves below. The time occupied
by the apparition of these meteors was comparatively short; suddenly
the three mock suns united in one, and plunged into the sea. A few
seconds afterwards, a deafening watery sound came up with awful peal
from the spot where they had disappeared.

Meanwhile the sun, disencumbered from his strange satellites, paced
with its accustomed majesty towards its western home. When—we dared not
trust our eyes late dazzled, but it seemed that—the sea rose to meet
it—it mounted higher and higher, till the fiery globe was obscured, and
the wall of water still ascended the horizon; it appeared as if
suddenly the motion of earth was revealed to us—as if no longer we were
ruled by ancient laws, but were turned adrift in an unknown region of
space. Many cried aloud, that these were no meteors, but globes of
burning matter, which had set fire to the earth, and caused the vast
cauldron at our feet to bubble up with its measureless waves; the day
of judgment was come they averred, and a few moments would transport us
before the awful countenance of the omnipotent judge; while those less
given to visionary terrors, declared that two conflicting gales had
occasioned the last phaenomenon. In support of this opinion they
pointed out the fact that the east wind died away, while the rushing of
the coming west mingled its wild howl with the roar of the advancing
waters. Would the cliff resist this new battery? Was not the giant wave
far higher than the precipice? Would not our little island be deluged
by its approach? The crowd of spectators fled. They were dispersed over
the fields, stopping now and then, and looking back in terror. A
sublime sense of awe calmed the swift pulsations of my heart—I awaited
the approach of the destruction menaced, with that solemn resignation
which an unavoidable necessity instils. The ocean every moment assumed
a more terrific aspect, while the twilight was dimmed by the rack which
the west wind spread over the sky. By slow degrees however, as the wave
advanced, it took a more mild appearance; some under current of air, or
obstruction in the bed of the waters, checked its progress, and it sank
gradually; while the surface of the sea became uniformly higher as it
dissolved into it. This change took from us the fear of an immediate
catastrophe, although we were still anxious as to the final result. We
continued during the whole night to watch the fury of the sea and the
pace of the driving clouds, through whose openings the rare stars
rushed impetuously; the thunder of conflicting elements deprived us of
all power to sleep.

This endured ceaselessly for three days and nights. The stoutest hearts
quailed before the savage enmity of nature; provisions began to fail
us, though every day foraging parties were dispersed to the nearer
towns. In vain we schooled ourselves into the belief, that there was
nothing out of the common order of nature in the strife we witnessed;
our disasterous and overwhelming destiny turned the best of us to
cowards. Death had hunted us through the course of many months, even to
the narrow strip of time on which we now stood; narrow indeed, and
buffeted by storms, was our footway overhanging the great sea of
calamity—

        As an unsheltered northern shore
Is shaken by the wintry wave—
And frequent storms for evermore,
(While from the west the loud winds rave,
Or from the east, or mountains hoar)
The struck and tott’ring sand-bank lave.[21]


It required more than human energy to bear up against the menaces of
destruction that every where surrounded us.

After the lapse of three days, the gale died away, the sea-gull sailed
upon the calm bosom of the windless atmosphere, and the last yellow
leaf on the topmost branch of the oak hung without motion. The sea no
longer broke with fury; but a swell setting in steadily for shore, with
long sweep and sullen burst replaced the roar of the breakers. Yet we
derived hope from the change, and we did not doubt that after the
interval of a few days the sea would resume its tranquillity. The
sunset of the fourth day favoured this idea; it was clear and golden.
As we gazed on the purple sea, radiant beneath, we were attracted by a
novel spectacle; a dark speck—as it neared, visibly a boat—rode on the
top of the waves, every now and then lost in the steep vallies between.
We marked its course with eager questionings; and, when we saw that it
evidently made for shore, we descended to the only practicable landing
place, and hoisted a signal to direct them. By the help of glasses we
distinguished her crew; it consisted of nine men, Englishmen, belonging
in truth to the two divisions of our people, who had preceded us, and
had been for several weeks at Paris. As countryman was wont to meet
countryman in distant lands, did we greet our visitors on their
landing, with outstretched hands and gladsome welcome. They were slow
to reciprocate our gratulations. They looked angry and resentful; not
less than the chafed sea which they had traversed with imminent peril,
though apparently more displeased with each other than with us. It was
strange to see these human beings, who appeared to be given forth by
the earth like rare and inestimable plants, full of towering passion,
and the spirit of angry contest. Their first demand was to be conducted
to the Lord Protector of England, so they called Adrian, though he had
long discarded the empty title, as a bitter mockery of the shadow to
which the Protectorship was now reduced. They were speedily led to
Dover Castle, from whose keep Adrian had watched the movements of the
boat. He received them with the interest and wonder so strange a
visitation created. In the confusion occasioned by their angry demands
for precedence, it was long before we could discover the secret meaning
of this strange scene. By degrees, from the furious declamations of
one, the fierce interruptions of another, and the bitter scoffs of a
third, we found that they were deputies from our colony at Paris, from
three parties there formed, who, each with angry rivalry, tried to
attain a superiority over the other two. These deputies had been
dispatched by them to Adrian, who had been selected arbiter; and they
had journied from Paris to Calais, through the vacant towns and
desolate country, indulging the while violent hatred against each
other; and now they pleaded their several causes with unmitigated
party-spirit.

By examining the deputies apart, and after much investigation, we
learnt the true state of things at Paris. Since parliament had elected
him Ryland’s deputy, all the surviving English had submitted to Adrian.
He was our captain to lead us from our native soil to unknown lands,
our lawgiver and our preserver. On the first arrangement of our scheme
of emigration, no continued separation of our members was contemplated,
and the command of the whole body in gradual ascent of power had its
apex in the Earl of Windsor. But unforeseen circumstances changed our
plans for us, and occasioned the greater part of our numbers to be
divided for the space of nearly two months, from the supreme chief.
They had gone over in two distinct bodies; and on their arrival at
Paris dissension arose between them.

They had found Paris a desert. When first the plague had appeared, the
return of travellers and merchants, and communications by letter,
informed us regularly of the ravages made by disease on the continent.
But with the encreased mortality this intercourse declined and ceased.
Even in England itself communication from one part of the island to the
other became slow and rare. No vessel stemmed the flood that divided
Calais from Dover; or if some melancholy voyager, wishing to assure
himself of the life or death of his relatives, put from the French
shore to return among us, often the greedy ocean swallowed his little
craft, or after a day or two he was infected by the disorder, and died
before he could tell the tale of the desolation of France. We were
therefore to a great degree ignorant of the state of things on the
continent, and were not without some vague hope of finding numerous
companions in its wide track. But the same causes that had so fearfully
diminished the English nation had had even greater scope for mischief
in the sister land. France was a blank; during the long line of road
from Calais to Paris not one human being was found. In Paris there were
a few, perhaps a hundred, who, resigned to their coming fate, flitted
about the streets of the capital and assembled to converse of past
times, with that vivacity and even gaiety that seldom deserts the
individuals of this nation.

The English took uncontested possession of Paris. Its high houses and
narrow streets were lifeless. A few pale figures were to be
distinguished at the accustomed resort at the Tuileries; they wondered
wherefore the islanders should approach their ill-fated city—for in the
excess of wretchedness, the sufferers always imagine, that their part
of the calamity is the bitterest, as, when enduring intense pain, we
would exchange the particular torture we writhe under, for any other
which should visit a different part of the frame. They listened to the
account the emigrants gave of their motives for leaving their native
land, with a shrug almost of disdain—“Return,” they said, “return to
your island, whose sea breezes, and division from the continent gives
some promise of health; if Pestilence among you has slain its hundreds,
with us it has slain its thousands. Are you not even now more numerous
than we are?—A year ago you would have found only the sick burying the
dead; now we are happier; for the pang of struggle has passed away, and
the few you find here are patiently waiting the final blow. But you,
who are not content to die, breathe no longer the air of France, or
soon you will only be a part of her soil.”

Thus, by menaces of the sword, they would have driven back those who
had escaped from fire. But the peril left behind was deemed imminent by
my countrymen; that before them doubtful and distant; and soon other
feelings arose to obliterate fear, or to replace it by passions, that
ought to have had no place among a brotherhood of unhappy survivors of
the expiring world.

The more numerous division of emigrants, which arrived first at Paris,
assumed a superiority of rank and power; the second party asserted
their independence. A third was formed by a sectarian, a self-erected
prophet, who, while he attributed all power and rule to God, strove to
get the real command of his comrades into his own hands. This third
division consisted of fewest individuals, but their purpose was more
one, their obedience to their leader more entire, their fortitude and
courage more unyielding and active.

During the whole progress of the plague, the teachers of religion were
in possession of great power; a power of good, if rightly directed, or
of incalculable mischief, if fanaticism or intolerance guided their
efforts. In the present instance, a worse feeling than either of these
actuated the leader. He was an impostor in the most determined sense of
the term. A man who had in early life lost, through the indulgence of
vicious propensities, all sense of rectitude or self-esteem; and who,
when ambition was awakened in him, gave himself up to its influence
unbridled by any scruple. His father had been a methodist preacher, an
enthusiastic man with simple intentions; but whose pernicious doctrines
of election and special grace had contributed to destroy all
conscientious feeling in his son. During the progress of the pestilence
he had entered upon various schemes, by which to acquire adherents and
power. Adrian had discovered and defeated these attempts; but Adrian
was absent; the wolf assumed the shepherd’s garb, and the flock
admitted the deception: he had formed a party during the few weeks he
had been in Paris, who zealously propagated the creed of his divine
mission, and believed that safety and salvation were to be afforded
only to those who put their trust in him.

When once the spirit of dissension had arisen, the most frivolous
causes gave it activity. The first party, on arriving at Paris, had
taken possession of the Tuileries; chance and friendly feeling had
induced the second to lodge near to them. A contest arose concerning
the distribution of the pillage; the chiefs of the first division
demanded that the whole should be placed at their disposal; with this
assumption the opposite party refused to comply. When next the latter
went to forage, the gates of Paris were shut on them. After overcoming
this difficulty, they marched in a body to the Tuileries. They found
that their enemies had been already expelled thence by the Elect, as
the fanatical party designated themselves, who refused to admit any
into the palace who did not first abjure obedience to all except God,
and his delegate on earth, their chief. Such was the beginning of the
strife, which at length proceeded so far, that the three divisions,
armed, met in the Place Vendome, each resolved to subdue by force the
resistance of its adversaries. They assembled, their muskets were
loaded, and even pointed at the breasts of their so called enemies. One
word had been sufficient; and there the last of mankind would have
burthened their souls with the crime of murder, and dipt their hands in
each other’s blood. A sense of shame, a recollection that not only
their cause, but the existence of the whole human race was at stake,
entered the breast of the leader of the more numerous party. He was
aware, that if the ranks were thinned, no other recruits could fill
them up; that each man was as a priceless gem in a kingly crown, which
if destroyed, the earth’s deep entrails could yield no paragon. He was
a young man, and had been hurried on by presumption, and the notion of
his high rank and superiority to all other pretenders; now he repented
his work, he felt that all the blood about to be shed would be on his
head; with sudden impulse therefore he spurred his horse between the
bands, and, having fixed a white handkerchief on the point of his
uplifted sword, thus demanded parley; the opposite leaders obeyed the
signal. He spoke with warmth; he reminded them of the oath all the
chiefs had taken to submit to the Lord Protector; he declared their
present meeting to be an act of treason and mutiny; he allowed that he
had been hurried away by passion, but that a cooler moment had arrived;
and he proposed that each party should send deputies to the Earl of
Windsor, inviting his interference and offering submission to his
decision. His offer was accepted so far, that each leader consented to
command a retreat, and moreover agreed, that after the approbation of
their several parties had been consulted, they should meet that night
on some neutral spot to ratify the truce. At the meeting of the chiefs,
this plan was finally concluded upon. The leader of the fanatics indeed
refused to admit the arbitration of Adrian; he sent ambassadors, rather
than deputies, to assert his claim, not plead his cause.

The truce was to continue until the first of February, when the bands
were again to assemble on the Place Vendome; it was of the utmost
consequence therefore that Adrian should arrive in Paris by that day,
since an hair might turn the scale, and peace, scared away by intestine
broils, might only return to watch by the silent dead. It was now the
twenty-eighth of January; every vessel stationed near Dover had been
beaten to pieces and destroyed by the furious storms I have
commemorated. Our journey however would admit of no delay. That very
night, Adrian, and I, and twelve others, either friends or attendants,
put off from the English shore, in the boat that had brought over the
deputies. We all took our turn at the oar; and the immediate occasion
of our departure affording us abundant matter for conjecture and
discourse, prevented the feeling that we left our native country,
depopulate England, for the last time, to enter deeply into the minds
of the greater part of our number. It was a serene starlight night, and
the dark line of the English coast continued for some time visible at
intervals, as we rose on the broad back of the waves. I exerted myself
with my long oar to give swift impulse to our skiff; and, while the
waters splashed with melancholy sound against its sides, I looked with
sad affection on this last glimpse of sea-girt England, and strained my
eyes not too soon to lose sight of the castellated cliff, which rose to
protect the land of heroism and beauty from the inroads of ocean, that,
turbulent as I had lately seen it, required such cyclopean walls for
its repulsion. A solitary sea-gull winged its flight over our heads, to
seek its nest in a cleft of the precipice. Yes, thou shalt revisit the
land of thy birth, I thought, as I looked invidiously on the airy
voyager; but we shall, never more! Tomb of Idris, farewell! Grave, in
which my heart lies sepultured, farewell for ever!

We were twelve hours at sea, and the heavy swell obliged us to exert
all our strength. At length, by mere dint of rowing, we reached the
French coast. The stars faded, and the grey morning cast a dim veil
over the silver horns of the waning moon—the sun rose broad and red
from the sea, as we walked over the sands to Calais. Our first care was
to procure horses, and although wearied by our night of watching and
toil, some of our party immediately went in quest of these in the wide
fields of the unenclosed and now barren plain round Calais. We divided
ourselves, like seamen, into watches, and some reposed, while others
prepared the morning’s repast. Our foragers returned at noon with only
six horses—on these, Adrian and I, and four others, proceeded on our
journey towards the great city, which its inhabitants had fondly named
the capital of the civilized world. Our horses had become, through
their long holiday, almost wild, and we crossed the plain round Calais
with impetuous speed. From the height near Boulogne, I turned again to
look on England; nature had cast a misty pall over her, her cliff was
hidden—there was spread the watery barrier that divided us, never again
to be crossed; she lay on the ocean plain,

In the great pool a swan’s nest.


Ruined the nest, alas! the swans of Albion had passed away for ever—an
uninhabited rock in the wide Pacific, which had remained since the
creation uninhabited, unnamed, unmarked, would be of as much account in
the world’s future history, as desert England.

Our journey was impeded by a thousand obstacles. As our horses grew
tired, we had to seek for others; and hours were wasted, while we
exhausted our artifices to allure some of these enfranchised slaves of
man to resume the yoke; or as we went from stable to stable through the
towns, hoping to find some who had not forgotten the shelter of their
native stalls. Our ill success in procuring them, obliged us
continually to leave some one of our companions behind; and on the
first of February, Adrian and I entered Paris, wholly unaccompanied.
The serene morning had dawned when we arrived at Saint Denis, and the
sun was high, when the clamour of voices, and the clash, as we feared,
of weapons, guided us to where our countrymen had assembled on the
Place Vendome. We passed a knot of Frenchmen, who were talking
earnestly of the madness of the insular invaders, and then coming by a
sudden turn upon the Place, we saw the sun glitter on drawn swords and
fixed bayonets, while yells and clamours rent the air. It was a scene
of unaccustomed confusion in these days of depopulation. Roused by
fancied wrongs, and insulting scoffs, the opposite parties had rushed
to attack each other; while the elect, drawn up apart, seemed to wait
an opportunity to fall with better advantage on their foes, when they
should have mutually weakened each other. A merciful power interposed,
and no blood was shed; for, while the insane mob were in the very act
of attack, the females, wives, mothers and daughters, rushed between;
they seized the bridles; they embraced the knees of the horsemen, and
hung on the necks, or enweaponed arms of their enraged relatives; the
shrill female scream was mingled with the manly shout, and formed the
wild clamour that welcomed us on our arrival.

Our voices could not be heard in the tumult; Adrian however was eminent
for the white charger he rode; spurring him, he dashed into the midst
of the throng: he was recognized, and a loud cry raised for England and
the Protector. The late adversaries, warmed to affection at the sight
of him, joined in heedless confusion, and surrounded him; the women
kissed his hands, and the edges of his garments; nay, his horse
received tribute of their embraces; some wept their welcome; he
appeared an angel of peace descended among them; and the only danger
was, that his mortal nature would be demonstrated, by his suffocation
from the kindness of his friends. His voice was at length heard, and
obeyed; the crowd fell back; the chiefs alone rallied round him. I had
seen Lord Raymond ride through his lines; his look of victory, and
majestic mien obtained the respect and obedience of all: such was not
the appearance or influence of Adrian. His slight figure, his fervent
look, his gesture, more of deprecation than rule, were proofs that
love, unmingled with fear, gave him dominion over the hearts of a
multitude, who knew that he never flinched from danger, nor was
actuated by other motives than care for the general welfare. No
distinction was now visible between the two parties, late ready to shed
each other’s blood, for, though neither would submit to the other, they
both yielded ready obedience to the Earl of Windsor.

One party however remained, cut off from the rest, which did not
sympathize in the joy exhibited on Adrian’s arrival, or imbibe the
spirit of peace, which fell like dew upon the softened hearts of their
countrymen. At the head of this assembly was a ponderous, dark-looking
man, whose malign eye surveyed with gloating delight the stern looks of
his followers. They had hitherto been inactive, but now, perceiving
themselves to be forgotten in the universal jubilee, they advanced with
threatening gestures: our friends had, as it were in wanton contention,
attacked each other; they wanted but to be told that their cause was
one, for it to become so: their mutual anger had been a fire of straw,
compared to the slow-burning hatred they both entertained for these
seceders, who seized a portion of the world to come, there to entrench
and incastellate themselves, and to issue with fearful sally, and
appalling denunciations, on the mere common children of the earth. The
first advance of the little army of the elect reawakened their rage;
they grasped their arms, and waited but their leader’s signal to
commence the attack, when the clear tones of Adrian’s voice were heard,
commanding them to fall back; with confused murmur and hurried retreat,
as the wave ebbs clamorously from the sands it lately covered, our
friends obeyed. Adrian rode singly into the space between the opposing
bands; he approached the hostile leader, as requesting him to imitate
his example, but his look was not obeyed, and the chief advanced,
followed by his whole troop. There were many women among them, who
seemed more eager and resolute than their male companions. They pressed
round their leader, as if to shield him, while they loudly bestowed on
him every sacred denomination and epithet of worship. Adrian met them
half way; they halted: “What,” he said, “do you seek? Do you require
any thing of us that we refuse to give, and that you are forced to
acquire by arms and warfare?”

His questions were answered by a general cry, in which the words
election, sin, and red right arm of God, could alone be heard.

Adrian looked expressly at their leader, saying, “Can you not silence
your followers? Mine, you perceive, obey me.”

The fellow answered by a scowl; and then, perhaps fearful that his
people should become auditors of the debate he expected to ensue, he
commanded them to fall back, and advanced by himself. “What, I again
ask,” said Adrian, “do you require of us?”

“Repentance,” replied the man, whose sinister brow gathered clouds as
he spoke. “Obedience to the will of the Most High, made manifest to
these his Elected People. Do we not all die through your sins, O
generation of unbelief, and have we not a right to demand of you
repentance and obedience?”

“And if we refuse them, what then?” his opponent inquired mildly.

“Beware,” cried the man, “God hears you, and will smite your stony
heart in his wrath; his poisoned arrows fly, his dogs of death are
unleashed! We will not perish unrevenged—and mighty will our avenger
be, when he descends in visible majesty, and scatters destruction among
you.”

“My good fellow,” said Adrian, with quiet scorn, “I wish that you were
ignorant only, and I think it would be no difficult task to prove to
you, that you speak of what you do not understand. On the present
occasion however, it is enough for me to know that you seek nothing of
us; and, heaven is our witness, we seek nothing of you. I should be
sorry to embitter by strife the few days that we any of us may have
here to live; when there,” he pointed downwards, “we shall not be able
to contend, while here we need not. Go home, or stay; pray to your God
in your own mode; your friends may do the like. My orisons consist in
peace and good will, in resignation and hope. Farewell!”

He bowed slightly to the angry disputant who was about to reply; and,
turning his horse down Rue Saint Honore, called on his friends to
follow him. He rode slowly, to give time to all to join him at the
Barrier, and then issued his orders that those who yielded obedience to
him, should rendezvous at Versailles. In the meantime he remained
within the walls of Paris, until he had secured the safe retreat of
all. In about a fortnight the remainder of the emigrants arrived from
England, and they all repaired to Versailles; apartments were prepared
for the family of the Protector in the Grand Trianon, and there, after
the excitement of these events, we reposed amidst the luxuries of the
departed Bourbons.

 [21] Chorus in Œdipus Coloneus.




CHAPTER V.


After the repose of a few days, we held a council, to decide on our
future movements. Our first plan had been to quit our wintry native
latitude, and seek for our diminished numbers the luxuries and delights
of a southern climate. We had not fixed on any precise spot as the
termination of our wanderings; but a vague picture of perpetual spring,
fragrant groves, and sparkling streams, floated in our imagination to
entice us on. A variety of causes had detained us in England, and we
had now arrived at the middle of February; if we pursued our original
project, we should find ourselves in a worse situation than before,
having exchanged our temperate climate for the intolerable heats of a
summer in Egypt or Persia. We were therefore obliged to modify our
plan, as the season continued to be inclement; and it was determined
that we should await the arrival of spring in our present abode, and so
order our future movements as to pass the hot months in the icy vallies
of Switzerland, deferring our southern progress until the ensuing
autumn, if such a season was ever again to be beheld by us.

The castle and town of Versailles afforded our numbers ample
accommodation, and foraging parties took it by turns to supply our
wants. There was a strange and appalling motley in the situation of
these the last of the race. At first I likened it to a colony, which
borne over the far seas, struck root for the first time in a new
country. But where was the bustle and industry characteristic of such
an assemblage; the rudely constructed dwelling, which was to suffice
till a more commodious mansion could be built; the marking out of
fields; the attempt at cultivation; the eager curiosity to discover
unknown animals and herbs; the excursions for the sake of exploring the
country? Our habitations were palaces—our food was ready stored in
granaries—there was no need of labour, no inquisitiveness, no restless
desire to get on. If we had been assured that we should secure the
lives of our present numbers, there would have been more vivacity and
hope in our councils. We should have discussed as to the period when
the existing produce for man’s sustenance would no longer suffice for
us, and what mode of life we should then adopt. We should have
considered more carefully our future plans, and debated concerning the
spot where we should in future dwell. But summer and the plague were
near, and we dared not look forward. Every heart sickened at the
thought of amusement; if the younger part of our community were ever
impelled, by youthful and untamed hilarity, to enter on any dance or
song, to cheer the melancholy time, they would suddenly break off,
checked by a mournful look or agonizing sigh from any one among them,
who was prevented by sorrows and losses from mingling in the festivity.
If laughter echoed under our roof, yet the heart was vacant of joy;
and, when ever it chanced that I witnessed such attempts at pastime,
they encreased instead of diminishing my sense of woe. In the midst of
the pleasure-hunting throng, I would close my eyes, and see before me
the obscure cavern, where was garnered the mortality of Idris, and the
dead lay around, mouldering in hushed repose. When I again became aware
of the present hour, softest melody of Lydian flute, or harmonious maze
of graceful dance, was but as the demoniac chorus in the Wolf’s Glen,
and the caperings of the reptiles that surrounded the magic circle.

My dearest interval of peace occurred, when, released from the
obligation of associating with the crowd, I could repose in the dear
home where my children lived. Children I say, for the tenderest
emotions of paternity bound me to Clara. She was now fourteen; sorrow,
and deep insight into the scenes around her, calmed the restless spirit
of girlhood; while the remembrance of her father whom she idolized, and
respect for me and Adrian, implanted an high sense of duty in her young
heart. Though serious she was not sad; the eager desire that makes us
all, when young, plume our wings, and stretch our necks, that we may
more swiftly alight tiptoe on the height of maturity, was subdued in
her by early experience. All that she could spare of overflowing love
from her parents’ memory, and attention to her living relatives, was
spent upon religion. This was the hidden law of her heart, which she
concealed with childish reserve, and cherished the more because it was
secret. What faith so entire, what charity so pure, what hope so
fervent, as that of early youth? and she, all love, all tenderness and
trust, who from infancy had been tossed on the wide sea of passion and
misfortune, saw the finger of apparent divinity in all, and her best
hope was to make herself acceptable to the power she worshipped. Evelyn
was only five years old; his joyous heart was incapable of sorrow, and
he enlivened our house with the innocent mirth incident to his years.

The aged Countess of Windsor had fallen from her dream of power, rank
and grandeur; she had been suddenly seized with the conviction, that
love was the only good of life, virtue the only ennobling distinction
and enriching wealth. Such a lesson had been taught her by the dead
lips of her neglected daughter; and she devoted herself, with all the
fiery violence of her character, to the obtaining the affection of the
remnants of her family. In early years the heart of Adrian had been
chilled towards her; and, though he observed a due respect, her
coldness, mixed with the recollection of disappointment and madness,
caused him to feel even pain in her society. She saw this, and yet
determined to win his love; the obstacle served the rather to excite
her ambition. As Henry, Emperor of Germany, lay in the snow before Pope
Leo’s gate for three winter days and nights, so did she in humility
wait before the icy barriers of his closed heart, till he, the servant
of love, and prince of tender courtesy, opened it wide for her
admittance, bestowing, with fervency and gratitude, the tribute of
filial affection she merited. Her understanding, courage, and presence
of mind, became powerful auxiliaries to him in the difficult task of
ruling the tumultuous crowd, which were subjected to his control, in
truth by a single hair.

The principal circumstances that disturbed our tranquillity during this
interval, originated in the vicinity of the impostor-prophet and his
followers. They continued to reside at Paris; but missionaries from
among them often visited Versailles—and such was the power of
assertions, however false, yet vehemently iterated, over the ready
credulity of the ignorant and fearful, that they seldom failed in
drawing over to their party some from among our numbers. An instance of
this nature coming immediately under our notice, we were led to
consider the miserable state in which we should leave our countrymen,
when we should, at the approach of summer, move on towards Switzerland,
and leave a deluded crew behind us in the hands of their miscreant
leader. The sense of the smallness of our numbers, and expectation of
decrease, pressed upon us; and, while it would be a subject of
congratulation to ourselves to add one to our party, it would be doubly
gratifying to rescue from the pernicious influence of superstition and
unrelenting tyranny, the victims that now, though voluntarily
enchained, groaned beneath it. If we had considered the preacher as
sincere in a belief of his own denunciations, or only moderately
actuated by kind feeling in the exercise of his assumed powers, we
should have immediately addressed ourselves to him, and endeavoured
with our best arguments to soften and humanize his views. But he was
instigated by ambition, he desired to rule over these last stragglers
from the fold of death; his projects went so far, as to cause him to
calculate that, if, from these crushed remains, a few survived, so that
a new race should spring up, he, by holding tight the reins of belief,
might be remembered by the post-pestilential race as a patriarch, a
prophet, nay a deity; such as of old among the post-diluvians were
Jupiter the conqueror, Serapis the lawgiver, and Vishnou the preserver.
These ideas made him inflexible in his rule, and violent in his hate of
any who presumed to share with him his usurped empire.

It is a strange fact, but incontestible, that the philanthropist, who
ardent in his desire to do good, who patient, reasonable and gentle,
yet disdains to use other argument than truth, has less influence over
men’s minds, than he who, grasping and selfish, refuses not to adopt
any means, nor awaken any passion, nor diffuse any falsehood, for the
advancement of his cause. If this from time immemorial has been the
case, the contrast was infinitely greater, now that the one could bring
harrowing fears and transcendent hopes into play; while the other had
few hopes to hold forth, nor could influence the imagination to
diminish the fears which he himself was the first to entertain. The
preacher had persuaded his followers, that their escape from the
plague, the salvation of their children, and the rise of a new race of
men from their seed, depended on their faith in, and their submission
to him. They greedily imbibed this belief; and their over-weening
credulity even rendered them eager to make converts to the same faith.

How to seduce any individuals from such an alliance of fraud, was a
frequent subject of Adrian’s meditations and discourse. He formed many
plans for the purpose; but his own troop kept him in full occupation to
ensure their fidelity and safety; beside which the preacher was as
cautious and prudent, as he was cruel. His victims lived under the
strictest rules and laws, which either entirely imprisoned them within
the Tuileries, or let them out in such numbers, and under such leaders,
as precluded the possibility of controversy. There was one among them
however whom I resolved to save; she had been known to us in happier
days; Idris had loved her; and her excellent nature made it peculiarly
lamentable that she should be sacrificed by this merciless cannibal of
souls.

This man had between two and three hundred persons enlisted under his
banners. More than half of them were women; there were about fifty
children of all ages; and not more than eighty men. They were mostly
drawn from that which, when such distinctions existed, was denominated
the lower rank of society. The exceptions consisted of a few high-born
females, who, panic-struck, and tamed by sorrow, had joined him. Among
these was one, young, lovely, and enthusiastic, whose very goodness
made her a more easy victim. I have mentioned her before: Juliet, the
youngest daughter, and now sole relic of the ducal house of L—-. There
are some beings, whom fate seems to select on whom to pour, in
unmeasured portion, the vials of her wrath, and whom she bathes even to
the lips in misery. Such a one was the ill-starred Juliet. She had lost
her indulgent parents, her brothers and sisters, companions of her
youth; in one fell swoop they had been carried off from her. Yet she
had again dared to call herself happy; united to her admirer, to him
who possessed and filled her whole heart, she yielded to the lethean
powers of love, and knew and felt only his life and presence. At the
very time when with keen delight she welcomed the tokens of maternity,
this sole prop of her life failed, her husband died of the plague. For
a time she had been lulled in insanity; the birth of her child restored
her to the cruel reality of things, but gave her at the same time an
object for whom to preserve at once life and reason. Every friend and
relative had died off, and she was reduced to solitude and penury; deep
melancholy and angry impatience distorted her judgment, so that she
could not persuade herself to disclose her distress to us. When she
heard of the plan of universal emigration, she resolved to remain
behind with her child, and alone in wide England to live or die, as
fate might decree, beside the grave of her beloved. She had hidden
herself in one of the many empty habitations of London; it was she who
rescued my Idris on the fatal twentieth of November, though my
immediate danger, and the subsequent illness of Idris, caused us to
forget our hapless friend. This circumstance had however brought her
again in contact with her fellow-creatures; a slight illness of her
infant, proved to her that she was still bound to humanity by an
indestructible tie; to preserve this little creature’s life became the
object of her being, and she joined the first division of migrants who
went over to Paris.

She became an easy prey to the methodist; her sensibility and acute
fears rendered her accessible to every impulse; her love for her child
made her eager to cling to the merest straw held out to save him. Her
mind, once unstrung, and now tuned by roughest inharmonious hands, made
her credulous: beautiful as fabled goddess, with voice of unrivalled
sweetness, burning with new lighted enthusiasm, she became a stedfast
proselyte, and powerful auxiliary to the leader of the elect. I had
remarked her in the crowd, on the day we met on the Place Vendome; and,
recollecting suddenly her providential rescue of my lost one, on the
night of the twentieth of November, I reproached myself for my neglect
and ingratitude, and felt impelled to leave no means that I could adopt
untried, to recall her to her better self, and rescue her from the
fangs of the hypocrite destroyer.

I will not, at this period of my story, record the artifices I used to
penetrate the asylum of the Tuileries, or give what would be a tedious
account of my stratagems, disappointments, and perseverance. I at last
succeeded in entering these walls, and roamed its halls and corridors
in eager hope to find my selected convert. In the evening I contrived
to mingle unobserved with the congregation, which assembled in the
chapel to listen to the crafty and eloquent harangue of their prophet.
I saw Juliet near him. Her dark eyes, fearfully impressed with the
restless glare of madness, were fixed on him; she held her infant, not
yet a year old, in her arms; and care of it alone could distract her
attention from the words to which she eagerly listened. After the
sermon was over, the congregation dispersed; all quitted the chapel
except she whom I sought; her babe had fallen asleep; so she placed it
on a cushion, and sat on the floor beside, watching its tranquil
slumber.

I presented myself to her; for a moment natural feeling produced a
sentiment of gladness, which disappeared again, when with ardent and
affectionate exhortation I besought her to accompany me in flight from
this den of superstition and misery. In a moment she relapsed into the
delirium of fanaticism, and, but that her gentle nature forbade, would
have loaded me with execrations. She conjured me, she commanded me to
leave her— “Beware, O beware,” she cried, “fly while yet your escape is
practicable. Now you are safe; but strange sounds and inspirations come
on me at times, and if the Eternal should in awful whisper reveal to me
his will, that to save my child you must be sacrificed, I would call in
the satellites of him you call the tyrant; they would tear you limb
from limb; nor would I hallow the death of him whom Idris loved, by a
single tear.”

She spoke hurriedly, with tuneless voice, and wild look; her child
awoke, and, frightened, began to cry; each sob went to the ill-fated
mother’s heart, and she mingled the epithets of endearment she
addressed to her infant, with angry commands that I should leave her.
Had I had the means, I would have risked all, have torn her by force
from the murderer’s den, and trusted to the healing balm of reason and
affection. But I had no choice, no power even of longer struggle; steps
were heard along the gallery, and the voice of the preacher drew near.
Juliet, straining her child in a close embrace, fled by another
passage. Even then I would have followed her; but my foe and his
satellites entered; I was surrounded, and taken prisoner.

I remembered the menace of the unhappy Juliet, and expected the full
tempest of the man’s vengeance, and the awakened wrath of his
followers, to fall instantly upon me. I was questioned. My answers were
simple and sincere. “His own mouth condemns him,” exclaimed the
impostor; “he confesses that his intention was to seduce from the way
of salvation our well-beloved sister in God; away with him to the
dungeon; to-morrow he dies the death; we are manifestly called upon to
make an example, tremendous and appalling, to scare the children of sin
from our asylum of the saved.”

My heart revolted from his hypocritical jargon: but it was unworthy of
me to combat in words with the ruffian; and my answer was cool; while,
far from being possessed with fear, methought, even at the worst, a man
true to himself, courageous and determined, could fight his way, even
from the boards of the scaffold, through the herd of these misguided
maniacs. “Remember,” I said, “who I am; and be well assured that I
shall not die unavenged. Your legal magistrate, the Lord Protector,
knew of my design, and is aware that I am here; the cry of blood will
reach him, and you and your miserable victims will long lament the
tragedy you are about to act.”

My antagonist did not deign to reply, even by a look;—“You know your
duty,” he said to his comrades,—“obey.”

In a moment I was thrown on the earth, bound, blindfolded, and hurried
away —liberty of limb and sight was only restored to me, when,
surrounded by dungeon-walls, dark and impervious, I found myself a
prisoner and alone.

Such was the result of my attempt to gain over the proselyte of this
man of crime; I could not conceive that he would dare put me to
death.—Yet I was in his hands; the path of his ambition had ever been
dark and cruel; his power was founded upon fear; the one word which
might cause me to die, unheard, unseen, in the obscurity of my dungeon,
might be easier to speak than the deed of mercy to act. He would not
risk probably a public execution; but a private assassination would at
once terrify any of my companions from attempting a like feat, at the
same time that a cautious line of conduct might enable him to avoid the
enquiries and the vengeance of Adrian.

Two months ago, in a vault more obscure than the one I now inhabited, I
had revolved the design of quietly laying me down to die; now I
shuddered at the approach of fate. My imagination was busied in shaping
forth the kind of death he would inflict. Would he allow me to wear out
life with famine; or was the food administered to me to be medicined
with death? Would he steal on me in my sleep; or should I contend to
the last with my murderers, knowing, even while I struggled, that I
must be overcome? I lived upon an earth whose diminished population a
child’s arithmetic might number; I had lived through long months with
death stalking close at my side, while at intervals the shadow of his
skeleton-shape darkened my path. I had believed that I despised the
grim phantom, and laughed his power to scorn.

Any other fate I should have met with courage, nay, have gone out
gallantly to encounter. But to be murdered thus at the midnight hour by
cold-blooded assassins, no friendly hand to close my eyes, or receive
my parting blessing—to die in combat, hate and execration—ah, why, my
angel love, didst thou restore me to life, when already I had stepped
within the portals of the tomb, now that so soon again I was to be
flung back a mangled corpse!

Hours passed—centuries. Could I give words to the many thoughts which
occupied me in endless succession during this interval, I should fill
volumes. The air was dank, the dungeon-floor mildewed and icy cold;
hunger came upon me too, and no sound reached me from without.
To-morrow the ruffian had declared that I should die. When would
to-morrow come? Was it not already here?

My door was about to be opened. I heard the key turn, and the bars and
bolts slowly removed. The opening of intervening passages permitted
sounds from the interior of the palace to reach me; and I heard the
clock strike one. They come to murder me, I thought; this hour does not
befit a public execution. I drew myself up against the wall opposite
the entrance; I collected my forces, I rallied my courage, I would not
fall a tame prey. Slowly the door receded on its hinges—I was ready to
spring forward to seize and grapple with the intruder, till the sight
of who it was changed at once the temper of my mind. It was Juliet
herself; pale and trembling she stood, a lamp in her hand, on the
threshold of the dungeon, looking at me with wistful countenance. But
in a moment she re-assumed her self-possession; and her languid eyes
recovered their brilliancy. She said, “I am come to save you, Verney.”

“And yourself also,” I cried: “dearest friend, can we indeed be saved?”

“Not a word,” she replied, “follow me!”

I obeyed instantly. We threaded with light steps many corridors,
ascended several flights of stairs, and passed through long galleries;
at the end of one she unlocked a low portal; a rush of wind
extinguished our lamp; but, in lieu of it, we had the blessed
moon-beams and the open face of heaven. Then first Juliet spoke:—“You
are safe,” she said, “God bless you!— farewell!”

I seized her reluctant hand—“Dear friend,” I cried, “misguided victim,
do you not intend to escape with me? Have you not risked all in
facilitating my flight? and do you think, that I will permit you to
return, and suffer alone the effects of that miscreant’s rage? Never!”

“Do not fear for me,” replied the lovely girl mournfully, “and do not
imagine that without the consent of our chief you could be without
these walls. It is he that has saved you; he assigned to me the part of
leading you hither, because I am best acquainted with your motives for
coming here, and can best appreciate his mercy in permitting you to
depart.”

“And are you,” I cried, “the dupe of this man? He dreads me alive as an
enemy, and dead he fears my avengers. By favouring this clandestine
escape he preserves a shew of consistency to his followers; but mercy
is far from his heart. Do you forget his artifices, his cruelty, and
fraud? As I am free, so are you. Come, Juliet, the mother of our lost
Idris will welcome you, the noble Adrian will rejoice to receive you;
you will find peace and love, and better hopes than fanaticism can
afford. Come, and fear not; long before day we shall be at Versailles;
close the door on this abode of crime —come, sweet Juliet, from
hypocrisy and guilt to the society of the affectionate and good.”

I spoke hurriedly, but with fervour: and while with gentle violence I
drew her from the portal, some thought, some recollection of past
scenes of youth and happiness, made her listen and yield to me;
suddenly she broke away with a piercing shriek:—“My child, my child! he
has my child; my darling girl is my hostage.”

She darted from me into the passage; the gate closed between us—she was
left in the fangs of this man of crime, a prisoner, still to inhale the
pestilential atmosphere which adhered to his demoniac nature; the
unimpeded breeze played on my cheek, the moon shone graciously upon me,
my path was free. Glad to have escaped, yet melancholy in my very joy,
I retrod my steps to Versailles.




CHAPTER VI.


Eventful winter passed; winter, the respite of our ills. By degrees the
sun, which with slant beams had before yielded the more extended reign
to night, lengthened his diurnal journey, and mounted his highest
throne, at once the fosterer of earth’s new beauty, and her lover. We
who, like flies that congregate upon a dry rock at the ebbing of the
tide, had played wantonly with time, allowing our passions, our hopes,
and our mad desires to rule us, now heard the approaching roar of the
ocean of destruction, and would have fled to some sheltered crevice,
before the first wave broke over us. We resolved without delay, to
commence our journey to Switzerland; we became eager to leave France.
Under the icy vaults of the glaciers, beneath the shadow of the pines,
the swinging of whose mighty branches was arrested by a load of snow;
beside the streams whose intense cold proclaimed their origin to be
from the slow-melting piles of congelated waters, amidst frequent
storms which might purify the air, we should find health, if in truth
health were not herself diseased.

We began our preparations at first with alacrity. We did not now bid
adieu to our native country, to the graves of those we loved, to the
flowers, and streams, and trees, which had lived beside us from
infancy. Small sorrow would be ours on leaving Paris. A scene of shame,
when we remembered our late contentions, and thought that we left
behind a flock of miserable, deluded victims, bending under the tyranny
of a selfish impostor. Small pangs should we feel in leaving the
gardens, woods, and halls of the palaces of the Bourbons at Versailles,
which we feared would soon be tainted by the dead, when we looked
forward to vallies lovelier than any garden, to mighty forests and
halls, built not for mortal majesty, but palaces of nature’s own, with
the Alp of marmoreal whiteness for their walls, the sky for their roof.

Yet our spirits flagged, as the day drew near which we had fixed for
our departure. Dire visions and evil auguries, if such things were,
thickened around us, so that in vain might men say—

These are their reasons, they are natural,[22]


we felt them to be ominous, and dreaded the future event enchained to
them. That the night owl should screech before the noon-day sun, that
the hard-winged bat should wheel around the bed of beauty, that
muttering thunder should in early spring startle the cloudless air,
that sudden and exterminating blight should fall on the tree and shrub,
were unaccustomed, but physical events, less horrible than the mental
creations of almighty fear. Some had sight of funeral processions, and
faces all begrimed with tears, which flitted through the long avenues
of the gardens, and drew aside the curtains of the sleepers at dead of
night. Some heard wailing and cries in the air; a mournful chaunt would
stream through the dark atmosphere, as if spirits above sang the
requiem of the human race. What was there in all this, but that fear
created other senses within our frames, making us see, hear, and feel
what was not? What was this, but the action of diseased imaginations
and childish credulity? So might it be; but what was most real, was the
existence of these very fears; the staring looks of horror, the faces
pale even to ghastliness, the voices struck dumb with harrowing dread,
of those among us who saw and heard these things. Of this number was
Adrian, who knew the delusion, yet could not cast off the clinging
terror. Even ignorant infancy appeared with timorous shrieks and
convulsions to acknowledge the presence of unseen powers. We must go:
in change of scene, in occupation, and such security as we still hoped
to find, we should discover a cure for these gathering horrors.

On mustering our company, we found them to consist of fourteen hundred
souls, men, women, and children. Until now therefore, we were
undiminished in numbers, except by the desertion of those who had
attached themselves to the impostor-prophet, and remained behind in
Paris. About fifty French joined us. Our order of march was easily
arranged; the ill success which had attended our division, determined
Adrian to keep all in one body. I, with an hundred men, went forward
first as purveyor, taking the road of the Côte d’Or, through Auxerre,
Dijon, Dole, over the Jura to Geneva. I was to make arrangements, at
every ten miles, for the accommodation of such numbers as I found the
town or village would receive, leaving behind a messenger with a
written order, signifying how many were to be quartered there. The
remainder of our tribe was then divided into bands of fifty each, every
division containing eighteen men, and the remainder, consisting of
women and children. Each of these was headed by an officer, who carried
the roll of names, by which they were each day to be mustered. If the
numbers were divided at night, in the morning those in the van waited
for those in the rear. At each of the large towns before mentioned, we
were all to assemble; and a conclave of the principal officers would
hold council for the general weal. I went first, as I said; Adrian
last. His mother, with Clara and Evelyn under her protection, remained
also with him. Thus our order being determined, I departed. My plan was
to go at first no further than Fontainebleau, where in a few days I
should be joined by Adrian, before I took flight again further
eastward.

My friend accompanied me a few miles from Versailles. He was sad; and,
in a tone of unaccustomed despondency, uttered a prayer for our speedy
arrival among the Alps, accompanied with an expression of vain regret
that we were not already there. “In that case,” I observed, “we can
quicken our march; why adhere to a plan whose dilatory proceeding you
already disapprove?”

“Nay,” replied he, “it is too late now. A month ago, and we were
masters of ourselves; now,—” he turned his face from me; though
gathering twilight had already veiled its expression, he turned it yet
more away, as he added —“a man died of the plague last night!”

He spoke in a smothered voice, then suddenly clasping his hands, he
exclaimed, “Swiftly, most swiftly advances the last hour for us all; as
the stars vanish before the sun, so will his near approach destroy us.
I have done my best; with grasping hands and impotent strength, I have
hung on the wheel of the chariot of plague; but she drags me along with
it, while, like Juggernaut, she proceeds crushing out the being of all
who strew the high road of life. Would that it were over—would that her
procession achieved, we had all entered the tomb together!”

Tears streamed from his eyes. “Again and again,” he continued, “will
the tragedy be acted; again I must hear the groans of the dying, the
wailing of the survivors; again witness the pangs, which, consummating
all, envelope an eternity in their evanescent existence. Why am I
reserved for this? Why the tainted wether of the flock, am I not struck
to earth among the first? It is hard, very hard, for one of woman born
to endure all that I endure!”

Hitherto, with an undaunted spirit, and an high feeling of duty and
worth, Adrian had fulfilled his self-imposed task. I had contemplated
him with reverence, and a fruitless desire of imitation. I now offered
a few words of encouragement and sympathy. He hid his face in his
hands, and while he strove to calm himself, he ejaculated, “For a few
months, yet for a few months more, let not, O God, my heart fail, or my
courage be bowed down; let not sights of intolerable misery madden this
half-crazed brain, or cause this frail heart to beat against its
prison-bound, so that it burst. I have believed it to be my destiny to
guide and rule the last of the race of man, till death extinguish my
government; and to this destiny I submit.

“Pardon me, Verney, I pain you, but I will no longer complain. Now I am
myself again, or rather I am better than myself. You have known how
from my childhood aspiring thoughts and high desires have warred with
inherent disease and overstrained sensitiveness, till the latter became
victors. You know how I placed this wasted feeble hand on the abandoned
helm of human government. I have been visited at times by intervals of
fluctuation; yet, until now, I have felt as if a superior and
indefatigable spirit had taken up its abode within me or rather
incorporated itself with my weaker being. The holy visitant has for a
time slept, perhaps to show me how powerless I am without its
inspiration. Yet, stay for a while, O Power of goodness and strength;
disdain not yet this rent shrine of fleshly mortality, O immortal
Capability! While one fellow creature remains to whom aid can be
afforded, stay by and prop your shattered, falling engine!”

His vehemence, and voice broken by irrepressible sighs, sunk to my
heart; his eyes gleamed in the gloom of night like two earthly stars;
and, his form dilating, his countenance beaming, truly it almost seemed
as if at his eloquent appeal a more than mortal spirit entered his
frame, exalting him above humanity. He turned quickly towards me, and
held out his hand. “Farewell, Verney,” he cried, “brother of my love,
farewell; no other weak expression must cross these lips, I am alive
again: to our tasks, to our combats with our unvanquishable foe, for to
the last I will struggle against her.”

He grasped my hand, and bent a look on me, more fervent and animated
than any smile; then turning his horse’s head, he touched the animal
with the spur, and was out of sight in a moment.

A man last night had died of the plague. The quiver was not emptied,
nor the bow unstrung. We stood as marks, while Parthian Pestilence
aimed and shot, insatiated by conquest, unobstructed by the heaps of
slain. A sickness of the soul, contagious even to my physical
mechanism, came over me. My knees knocked together, my teeth chattered,
the current of my blood, clotted by sudden cold, painfully forced its
way from my heavy heart. I did not fear for myself, but it was misery
to think that we could not even save this remnant. That those I loved
might in a few days be as clay-cold as Idris in her antique tomb; nor
could strength of body or energy of mind ward off the blow. A sense of
degradation came over me. Did God create man, merely in the end to
become dead earth in the midst of healthful vegetating nature? Was he
of no more account to his Maker, than a field of corn blighted in the
ear? Were our proud dreams thus to fade? Our name was written “a little
lower than the angels;” and, behold, we were no better than ephemera.
We had called ourselves the “paragon of animals,” and, lo! we were a
“quint-essence of dust.” We repined that the pyramids had outlasted the
embalmed body of their builder. Alas! the mere shepherd’s hut of straw
we passed on the road, contained in its structure the principle of
greater longevity than the whole race of man. How reconcile this sad
change to our past aspirations, to our apparent powers!

Sudden an internal voice, articulate and clear, seemed to say:—Thus
from eternity, it was decreed: the steeds that bear Time onwards had
this hour and this fulfilment enchained to them, since the void brought
forth its burthen. Would you read backwards the unchangeable laws of
Necessity?

Mother of the world! Servant of the Omnipotent! eternal, changeless
Necessity! who with busy fingers sittest ever weaving the indissoluble
chain of events!—I will not murmur at thy acts. If my human mind cannot
acknowledge that all that is, is right; yet since what is, must be, I
will sit amidst the ruins and smile. Truly we were not born to enjoy,
but to submit, and to hope.

Will not the reader tire, if I should minutely describe our long-drawn
journey from Paris to Geneva? If, day by day, I should record, in the
form of a journal, the thronging miseries of our lot, could my hand
write, or language afford words to express, the variety of our woe; the
hustling and crowding of one deplorable event upon another? Patience,
oh reader! whoever thou art, wherever thou dwellest, whether of race
spiritual, or, sprung from some surviving pair, thy nature will be
human, thy habitation the earth; thou wilt here read of the acts of the
extinct race, and wilt ask wonderingly, if they, who suffered what thou
findest recorded, were of frail flesh and soft organization like
thyself. Most true, they were— weep therefore; for surely, solitary
being, thou wilt be of gentle disposition; shed compassionate tears;
but the while lend thy attention to the tale, and learn the deeds and
sufferings of thy predecessors.

Yet the last events that marked our progress through France were so
full of strange horror and gloomy misery, that I dare not pause too
long in the narration. If I were to dissect each incident, every small
fragment of a second would contain an harrowing tale, whose minutest
word would curdle the blood in thy young veins. It is right that I
should erect for thy instruction this monument of the foregone race;
but not that I should drag thee through the wards of an hospital, nor
the secret chambers of the charnel-house. This tale, therefore, shall
be rapidly unfolded. Images of destruction, pictures of despair, the
procession of the last triumph of death, shall be drawn before thee,
swift as the rack driven by the north wind along the blotted splendour
of the sky.

Weed-grown fields, desolate towns, the wild approach of riderless
horses had now become habitual to my eyes; nay, sights far worse, of
the unburied dead, and human forms which were strewed on the road side,
and on the steps of once frequented habitations, where,

        Through the flesh that wastes away
Beneath the parching sun, the whitening bones
Start forth, and moulder in the sable dust.[23]


Sights like these had become—ah, woe the while! so familiar, that we
had ceased to shudder, or spur our stung horses to sudden speed, as we
passed them. France in its best days, at least that part of France
through which we travelled, had been a cultivated desert, and the
absence of enclosures, of cottages, and even of peasantry, was
saddening to a traveller from sunny Italy, or busy England. Yet the
towns were frequent and lively, and the cordial politeness and ready
smile of the wooden-shoed peasant restored good humour to the
splenetic. Now, the old woman sat no more at the door with her
distaff—the lank beggar no longer asked charity in courtier-like
phrase; nor on holidays did the peasantry thread with slow grace the
mazes of the dance. Silence, melancholy bride of death, went in
procession with him from town to town through the spacious region.

We arrived at Fontainebleau, and speedily prepared for the reception of
our friends. On mustering our numbers for the night, three were found
missing. When I enquired for them, the man to whom I spoke, uttered the
word “plague,” and fell at my feet in convulsions; he also was
infected. There were hard faces around me; for among my troop were
sailors who had crossed the line times unnumbered, soldiers who, in
Russia and far America, had suffered famine, cold and danger, and men
still sterner-featured, once nightly depredators in our over-grown
metropolis; men bred from their cradle to see the whole machine of
society at work for their destruction. I looked round, and saw upon the
faces of all horror and despair written in glaring characters.

We passed four days at Fontainebleau. Several sickened and died, and in
the mean time neither Adrian nor any of our friends appeared. My own
troop was in commotion; to reach Switzerland, to plunge into rivers of
snow, and to dwell in caves of ice, became the mad desire of all. Yet
we had promised to wait for the Earl; and he came not. My people
demanded to be led forward— rebellion, if so we might call what was the
mere casting away of straw-formed shackles, appeared manifestly among
them. They would away on the word without a leader. The only chance of
safety, the only hope of preservation from every form of indescribable
suffering, was our keeping together. I told them this; while the most
determined among them answered with sullenness, that they could take
care of themselves, and replied to my entreaties with scoffs and
menaces.

At length, on the fifth day, a messenger arrived from Adrian, bearing
letters, which directed us to proceed to Auxerre, and there await his
arrival, which would only be deferred for a few days. Such was the
tenor of his public letters. Those privately delivered to me, detailed
at length the difficulties of his situation, and left the arrangement
of my future plans to my own discretion. His account of the state of
affairs at Versailles was brief, but the oral communications of his
messenger filled up his omissions, and shewed me that perils of the
most frightful nature were gathering around him. At first the
re-awakening of the plague had been concealed; but the number of deaths
encreasing, the secret was divulged, and the destruction already
achieved, was exaggerated by the fears of the survivors. Some
emissaries of the enemy of mankind, the accursed Impostors, were among
them instilling their doctrine that safety and life could only be
ensured by submission to their chief; and they succeeded so well, that
soon, instead of desiring to proceed to Switzerland, the major part of
the multitude, weak-minded women, and dastardly men, desired to return
to Paris, and, by ranging themselves under the banners of the so called
prophet, and by a cowardly worship of the principle of evil, to
purchase respite, as they hoped, from impending death. The discord and
tumult induced by these conflicting fears and passions, detained
Adrian. It required all his ardour in pursuit of an object, and his
patience under difficulties, to calm and animate such a number of his
followers, as might counterbalance the panic of the rest, and lead them
back to the means from which alone safety could be derived. He had
hoped immediately to follow me; but, being defeated in this intention,
he sent his messenger urging me to secure my own troop at such a
distance from Versailles, as to prevent the contagion of rebellion from
reaching them; promising, at the same time, to join me the moment a
favourable occasion should occur, by means of which he could withdraw
the main body of the emigrants from the evil influence at present
exercised over them.

I was thrown into a most painful state of uncertainty by these
communications. My first impulse was that we should all return to
Versailles, there to assist in extricating our chief from his perils. I
accordingly assembled my troop, and proposed to them this retrograde
movement, instead of the continuation of our journey to Auxerre. With
one voice they refused to comply. The notion circulated among them was,
that the ravages of the plague alone detained the Protector; they
opposed his order to my request; they came to a resolve to proceed
without me, should I refuse to accompany them. Argument and adjuration
were lost on these dastards. The continual diminution of their own
numbers, effected by pestilence, added a sting to their dislike of
delay; and my opposition only served to bring their resolution to a
crisis. That same evening they departed towards Auxerre. Oaths, as from
soldiers to their general, had been taken by them: these they broke. I
also had engaged myself not to desert them; it appeared to me inhuman
to ground any infraction of my word on theirs. The same spirit that
caused them to rebel against me, would impel them to desert each other;
and the most dreadful sufferings would be the consequence of their
journey in their present unordered and chiefless array. These feelings
for a time were paramount; and, in obedience to them, I accompanied the
rest towards Auxerre. We arrived the same night at
Villeneuve-la-Guiard, a town at the distance of four posts from
Fontainebleau. When my companions had retired to rest, and I was left
alone to revolve and ruminate upon the intelligence I received of
Adrian’s situation, another view of the subject presented itself to me.
What was I doing, and what was the object of my present movements?
Apparently I was to lead this troop of selfish and lawless men towards
Switzerland, leaving behind my family and my selected friend, which,
subject as they were hourly to the death that threatened to all, I
might never see again. Was it not my first duty to assist the
Protector, setting an example of attachment and duty? At a crisis, such
as the one I had reached, it is very difficult to balance nicely
opposing interests, and that towards which our inclinations lead us,
obstinately assumes the appearance of selfishness, even when we
meditate a sacrifice. We are easily led at such times to make a
compromise of the question; and this was my present resource. I
resolved that very night to ride to Versailles; if I found affairs less
desperate than I now deemed them, I would return without delay to my
troop; I had a vague idea that my arrival at that town, would occasion
some sensation more or less strong, of which we might profit, for the
purpose of leading forward the vacillating multitude—at least no time
was to be lost—I visited the stables, I saddled my favourite horse, and
vaulting on his back, without giving myself time for further reflection
or hesitation, quitted Villeneuve-la-Guiard on my return to Versailles.

I was glad to escape from my rebellious troop, and to lose sight for a
time, of the strife of evil with good, where the former for ever
remained triumphant. I was stung almost to madness by my uncertainty
concerning the fate of Adrian, and grew reckless of any event, except
what might lose or preserve my unequalled friend. With an heavy heart,
that sought relief in the rapidity of my course, I rode through the
night to Versailles. I spurred my horse, who addressed his free limbs
to speed, and tossed his gallant head in pride. The constellations
reeled swiftly by, swiftly each tree and stone and landmark fled past
my onward career. I bared my head to the rushing wind, which bathed my
brow in delightful coolness. As I lost sight of Villeneuve-la-Guiard, I
forgot the sad drama of human misery; methought it was happiness enough
to live, sensitive the while of the beauty of the verdure-clad earth,
the star-bespangled sky, and the tameless wind that lent animation to
the whole. My horse grew tired—and I, forgetful of his fatigue, still
as he lagged, cheered him with my voice, and urged him with the spur.
He was a gallant animal, and I did not wish to exchange him for any
chance beast I might light on, leaving him never to be refound. All
night we went forward; in the morning he became sensible that we
approached Versailles, to reach which as his home, he mustered his
flagging strength. The distance we had come was not less than fifty
miles, yet he shot down the long Boulevards swift as an arrow; poor
fellow, as I dismounted at the gate of the castle, he sunk on his
knees, his eyes were covered with a film, he fell on his side, a few
gasps inflated his noble chest, and he died. I saw him expire with an
anguish, unaccountable even to myself, the spasm was as the wrenching
of some limb in agonizing torture, but it was brief as it was
intolerable. I forgot him, as I swiftly darted through the open portal,
and up the majestic stairs of this castle of victories—heard Adrian’s
voice—O fool! O woman nurtured, effeminate and contemptible being—I
heard his voice, and answered it with convulsive shrieks; I rushed into
the Hall of Hercules, where he stood surrounded by a crowd, whose eyes,
turned in wonder on me, reminded me that on the stage of the world, a
man must repress such girlish extacies. I would have given worlds to
have embraced him; I dared not—Half in exhaustion, half voluntarily, I
threw myself at my length on the ground— dare I disclose the truth to
the gentle offspring of solitude? I did so, that I might kiss the dear
and sacred earth he trod.

I found everything in a state of tumult. An emissary of the leader of
the elect, had been so worked up by his chief, and by his own fanatical
creed, as to make an attempt on the life of the Protector and preserver
of lost mankind. His hand was arrested while in the act of poignarding
the Earl; this circumstance had caused the clamour I heard on my
arrival at the castle, and the confused assembly of persons that I
found assembled in the Salle d’Hercule. Although superstition and
demoniac fury had crept among the emigrants, yet several adhered with
fidelity to their noble chieftain; and many, whose faith and love had
been unhinged by fear, felt all their latent affection rekindled by
this detestable attempt. A phalanx of faithful breasts closed round
him; the wretch, who, although a prisoner and in bonds, vaunted his
design, and madly claimed the crown of martyrdom, would have been torn
to pieces, had not his intended victim interposed. Adrian, springing
forward, shielded him with his own person, and commanded with energy
the submission of his infuriate friends—at this moment I had entered.

Discipline and peace were at length restored in the castle; and then
Adrian went from house to house, from troop to troop, to soothe the
disturbed minds of his followers, and recall them to their ancient
obedience. But the fear of immediate death was still rife amongst these
survivors of a world’s destruction; the horror occasioned by the
attempted assassination, past away; each eye turned towards Paris. Men
love a prop so well, that they will lean on a pointed poisoned spear;
and such was he, the impostor, who, with fear of hell for his scourge,
most ravenous wolf, played the driver to a credulous flock.

It was a moment of suspense, that shook even the resolution of the
unyielding friend of man. Adrian for one moment was about to give in,
to cease the struggle, and quit, with a few adherents, the deluded
crowd, leaving them a miserable prey to their passions, and to the
worse tyrant who excited them. But again, after a brief fluctuation of
purpose, he resumed his courage and resolves, sustained by the
singleness of his purpose, and the untried spirit of benevolence which
animated him. At this moment, as an omen of excellent import, his
wretched enemy pulled destruction on his head, destroying with his own
hands the dominion he had erected.

His grand hold upon the minds of men, took its rise from the doctrine
inculcated by him, that those who believed in, and followed him, were
the remnant to be saved, while all the rest of mankind were marked out
for death. Now, at the time of the Flood, the omnipotent repented him
that he had created man, and as then with water, now with the arrows of
pestilence, was about to annihilate all, except those who obeyed his
decrees, promulgated by the _ipse dixit_ prophet. It is impossible to
say on what foundations this man built his hopes of being able to carry
on such an imposture. It is likely that he was fully aware of the lie
which murderous nature might give to his assertions, and believed it to
be the cast of a die, whether he should in future ages be reverenced as
an inspired delegate from heaven, or be recognized as an impostor by
the present dying generation. At any rate he resolved to keep up the
drama to the last act. When, on the first approach of summer, the fatal
disease again made its ravages among the followers of Adrian, the
impostor exultingly proclaimed the exemption of his own congregation
from the universal calamity. He was believed; his followers, hitherto
shut up in Paris, now came to Versailles. Mingling with the coward band
there assembled, they reviled their admirable leader, and asserted
their own superiority and exemption. At length the plague, slow-footed,
but sure in her noiseless advance, destroyed the illusion, invading the
congregation of the elect, and showering promiscuous death among them.
Their leader endeavoured to conceal this event; he had a few followers,
who, admitted into the arcana of his wickedness, could help him in the
execution of his nefarious designs. Those who sickened were immediately
and quietly withdrawn, the cord and a midnight-grave disposed of them
for ever; while some plausible excuse was given for their absence. At
last a female, whose maternal vigilance subdued even the effects of the
narcotics administered to her, became a witness of their murderous
designs on her only child. Mad with horror, she would have burst among
her deluded fellow-victims, and, wildly shrieking, have awaked the dull
ear of night with the history of the fiend-like crime; when the
Impostor, in his last act of rage and desperation, plunged a poignard
in her bosom. Thus wounded to death, her garments dripping with her own
life-blood, bearing her strangled infant in her arms, beautiful and
young as she was, Juliet, (for it was she) denounced to the host of
deceived believers, the wickedness of their leader. He saw the aghast
looks of her auditors, changing from horror to fury—the names of those
already sacrificed were echoed by their relatives, now assured of their
loss. The wretch with that energy of purpose, which had borne him thus
far in his guilty career, saw his danger, and resolved to evade the
worst forms of it—he rushed on one of the foremost, seized a pistol
from his girdle, and his loud laugh of derision mingled with the report
of the weapon with which he destroyed himself.

They left his miserable remains even where they lay; they placed the
corpse of poor Juliet and her babe upon a bier, and all, with hearts
subdued to saddest regret, in long procession walked towards
Versailles. They met troops of those who had quitted the kindly
protection of Adrian, and were journeying to join the fanatics. The
tale of horror was recounted—all turned back; and thus at last,
accompanied by the undiminished numbers of surviving humanity, and
preceded by the mournful emblem of their recovered reason, they
appeared before Adrian, and again and for ever vowed obedience to his
commands, and fidelity to his cause.

 [22] Shakespeare—Julius Cæsar.


 [23] Elton’s Translation of Hesiod’s “Shield of Hercules.”




CHAPTER VII.


These events occupied so much time, that June had numbered more than
half its days, before we again commenced our long-protracted journey.
The day after my return to Versailles, six men, from among those I had
left at Villeneuve-la-Guiard, arrived, with intelligence, that the rest
of the troop had already proceeded towards Switzerland. We went forward
in the same track.

It is strange, after an interval of time, to look back on a period,
which, though short in itself, appeared, when in actual progress, to be
drawn out interminably. By the end of July we entered Dijon; by the end
of July those hours, days, and weeks had mingled with the ocean of
forgotten time, which in their passage teemed with fatal events and
agonizing sorrow. By the end of July, little more than a month had gone
by, if man’s life were measured by the rising and setting of the sun:
but, alas! in that interval ardent youth had become grey-haired;
furrows deep and uneraseable were trenched in the blooming cheek of the
young mother; the elastic limbs of early manhood, paralyzed as by the
burthen of years, assumed the decrepitude of age. Nights passed, during
whose fatal darkness the sun grew old before it rose; and burning days,
to cool whose baleful heat the balmy eve, lingering far in eastern
climes, came lagging and ineffectual; days, in which the dial, radiant
in its noon-day station, moved not its shadow the space of a little
hour, until a whole life of sorrow had brought the sufferer to an
untimely grave.

We departed from Versailles fifteen hundred souls. We set out on the
eighteenth of June. We made a long procession, in which was contained
every dear relationship, or tie of love, that existed in human society.
Fathers and husbands, with guardian care, gathered their dear relatives
around them; wives and mothers looked for support to the manly form
beside them, and then with tender anxiety bent their eyes on the infant
troop around. They were sad, but not hopeless. Each thought that
someone would be saved; each, with that pertinacious optimism, which to
the last characterized our human nature, trusted that their beloved
family would be the one preserved.

We passed through France, and found it empty of inhabitants. Some one
or two natives survived in the larger towns, which they roamed through
like ghosts; we received therefore small encrease to our numbers, and
such decrease through death, that at last it became easier to count the
scanty list of survivors. As we never deserted any of the sick, until
their death permitted us to commit their remains to the shelter of a
grave, our journey was long, while every day a frightful gap was made
in our troop—they died by tens, by fifties, by hundreds. No mercy was
shewn by death; we ceased to expect it, and every day welcomed the sun
with the feeling that we might never see it rise again.

The nervous terrors and fearful visions which had scared us during the
spring, continued to visit our coward troop during this sad journey.
Every evening brought its fresh creation of spectres; a ghost was
depicted by every blighted tree; and appalling shapes were manufactured
from each shaggy bush. By degrees these common marvels palled on us,
and then other wonders were called into being. Once it was confidently
asserted, that the sun rose an hour later than its seasonable time;
again it was discovered that he grew paler and paler; that shadows took
an uncommon appearance. It was impossible to have imagined, during the
usual calm routine of life men had before experienced, the terrible
effects produced by these extravagant delusions: in truth, of such
little worth are our senses, when unsupported by concurring testimony,
that it was with the utmost difficulty I kept myself free from the
belief in supernatural events, to which the major part of our people
readily gave credit. Being one sane amidst a crowd of the mad, I hardly
dared assert to my own mind, that the vast luminary had undergone no
change—that the shadows of night were unthickened by innumerable shapes
of awe and terror; or that the wind, as it sung in the trees, or
whistled round an empty building, was not pregnant with sounds of
wailing and despair. Sometimes realities took ghostly shapes; and it
was impossible for one’s blood not to curdle at the perception of an
evident mixture of what we knew to be true, with the visionary
semblance of all that we feared.

Once, at the dusk of the evening, we saw a figure all in white,
apparently of more than human stature, flourishing about the road, now
throwing up its arms, now leaping to an astonishing height in the air,
then turning round several times successively, then raising itself to
its full height and gesticulating violently. Our troop, on the alert to
discover and believe in the supernatural, made a halt at some distance
from this shape; and, as it became darker, there was something
appalling even to the incredulous, in the lonely spectre, whose
gambols, if they hardly accorded with spiritual dignity, were beyond
human powers. Now it leapt right up in the air, now sheer over a high
hedge, and was again the moment after in the road before us. By the
time I came up, the fright experienced by the spectators of this
ghostly exhibition, began to manifest itself in the flight of some, and
the close huddling together of the rest. Our goblin now perceived us;
he approached, and, as we drew reverentially back, made a low bow. The
sight was irresistibly ludicrous even to our hapless band, and his
politeness was hailed by a shout of laughter;—then, again springing up,
as a last effort, it sunk to the ground, and became almost invisible
through the dusky night. This circumstance again spread silence and
fear through the troop; the more courageous at length advanced, and,
raising the dying wretch, discovered the tragic explanation of this
wild scene. It was an opera-dancer, and had been one of the troop which
deserted from Villeneuve-la-Guiard: falling sick, he had been deserted
by his companions; in an access of delirium he had fancied himself on
the stage, and, poor fellow, his dying sense eagerly accepted the last
human applause that could ever be bestowed on his grace and agility.

At another time we were haunted for several days by an apparition, to
which our people gave the appellation of the Black Spectre. We never
saw it except at evening, when his coal black steed, his mourning
dress, and plume of black feathers, had a majestic and awe-striking
appearance; his face, one said, who had seen it for a moment, was ashy
pale; he had lingered far behind the rest of his troop, and suddenly at
a turn in the road, saw the Black Spectre coming towards him; he hid
himself in fear, and the horse and his rider slowly past, while the
moonbeams fell on the face of the latter, displaying its unearthly hue.
Sometimes at dead of night, as we watched the sick, we heard one
galloping through the town; it was the Black Spectre come in token of
inevitable death. He grew giant tall to vulgar eyes; an icy atmosphere,
they said, surrounded him; when he was heard, all animals shuddered,
and the dying knew that their last hour was come. It was Death himself,
they declared, come visibly to seize on subject earth, and quell at
once our decreasing numbers, sole rebels to his law. One day at noon,
we saw a dark mass on the road before us, and, coming up, beheld the
Black Spectre fallen from his horse, lying in the agonies of disease
upon the ground. He did not survive many hours; and his last words
disclosed the secret of his mysterious conduct. He was a French noble
of distinction, who, from the effects of plague, had been left alone in
his district; during many months, he had wandered from town to town,
from province to province, seeking some survivor for a companion, and
abhorring the loneliness to which he was condemned. When he discovered
our troop, fear of contagion conquered his love of society. He dared
not join us, yet he could not resolve to lose sight of us, sole human
beings who besides himself existed in wide and fertile France; so he
accompanied us in the spectral guise I have described, till pestilence
gathered him to a larger congregation, even that of Dead Mankind.

It had been well, if such vain terrors could have distracted our
thoughts from more tangible evils. But these were too dreadful and too
many not to force themselves into every thought, every moment, of our
lives. We were obliged to halt at different periods for days together,
till another and yet another was consigned as a clod to the vast clod
which had been once our living mother. Thus we continued travelling
during the hottest season; and it was not till the first of August,
that we, the emigrants,—reader, there were just eighty of us in
number,—entered the gates of Dijon.

We had expected this moment with eagerness, for now we had accomplished
the worst part of our drear journey, and Switzerland was near at hand.
Yet how could we congratulate ourselves on any event thus imperfectly
fulfilled? Were these miserable beings, who, worn and wretched, passed
in sorrowful procession, the sole remnants of the race of man, which,
like a flood, had once spread over and possessed the whole earth? It
had come down clear and unimpeded from its primal mountain source in
Ararat, and grew from a puny streamlet to a vast perennial river,
generation after generation flowing on ceaselessly. The same, but
diversified, it grew, and swept onwards towards the absorbing ocean,
whose dim shores we now reached. It had been the mere plaything of
nature, when first it crept out of uncreative void into light; but
thought brought forth power and knowledge; and, clad with these, the
race of man assumed dignity and authority. It was then no longer the
mere gardener of earth, or the shepherd of her flocks; “it carried with
it an imposing and majestic aspect; it had a pedigree and illustrious
ancestors; it had its gallery of portraits, its monumental
inscriptions, its records and titles.”[24]

This was all over, now that the ocean of death had sucked in the
slackening tide, and its source was dried up. We first had bidden adieu
to the state of things which having existed many thousand years, seemed
eternal; such a state of government, obedience, traffic, and domestic
intercourse, as had moulded our hearts and capacities, as far back as
memory could reach. Then to patriotic zeal, to the arts, to reputation,
to enduring fame, to the name of country, we had bidden farewell. We
saw depart all hope of retrieving our ancient state—all expectation,
except the feeble one of saving our individual lives from the wreck of
the past. To preserve these we had quitted England—England, no more;
for without her children, what name could that barren island claim?
With tenacious grasp we clung to such rule and order as could best save
us; trusting that, if a little colony could be preserved, that would
suffice at some remoter period to restore the lost community of
mankind.

But the game is up! We must all die; nor leave survivor nor heir to the
wide inheritance of earth. We must all die! The species of man must
perish; his frame of exquisite workmanship; the wondrous mechanism of
his senses; the noble proportion of his godlike limbs; his mind, the
throned king of these; must perish. Will the earth still keep her place
among the planets; will she still journey with unmarked regularity
round the sun; will the seasons change, the trees adorn themselves with
leaves, and flowers shed their fragrance, in solitude? Will the
mountains remain unmoved, and streams still keep a downward course
towards the vast abyss; will the tides rise and fall, and the winds fan
universal nature; will beasts pasture, birds fly, and fishes swim, when
man, the lord, possessor, perceiver, and recorder of all these things,
has passed away, as though he had never been? O, what mockery is this!
Surely death is not death, and humanity is not extinct; but merely
passed into other shapes, unsubjected to our perceptions. Death is a
vast portal, an high road to life: let us hasten to pass; let us exist
no more in this living death, but die that we may live!

We had longed with inexpressible earnestness to reach Dijon, since we
had fixed on it, as a kind of station in our progress. But now we
entered it with a torpor more painful than acute suffering. We had come
slowly but irrevocably to the opinion, that our utmost efforts would
not preserve one human being alive. We took our hands therefore away
from the long grasped rudder; and the frail vessel on which we floated,
seemed, the government over her suspended, to rush, prow foremost, into
the dark abyss of the billows. A gush of grief, a wanton profusion of
tears, and vain laments, and overflowing tenderness, and passionate but
fruitless clinging to the priceless few that remained, was followed by
languor and recklessness.

During this disastrous journey we lost all those, not of our own
family, to whom we had particularly attached ourselves among the
survivors. It were not well to fill these pages with a mere catalogue
of losses; yet I cannot refrain from this last mention of those
principally dear to us. The little girl whom Adrian had rescued from
utter desertion, during our ride through London on the twentieth of
November, died at Auxerre. The poor child had attached herself greatly
to us; and the suddenness of her death added to our sorrow. In the
morning we had seen her apparently in health—in the evening, Lucy,
before we retired to rest, visited our quarters to say that she was
dead. Poor Lucy herself only survived, till we arrived at Dijon. She
had devoted herself throughout to the nursing the sick, and attending
the friendless. Her excessive exertions brought on a slow fever, which
ended in the dread disease whose approach soon released her from her
sufferings. She had throughout been endeared to us by her good
qualities, by her ready and cheerful execution of every duty, and mild
acquiescence in every turn of adversity. When we consigned her to the
tomb, we seemed at the same time to bid a final adieu to those
peculiarly feminine virtues conspicuous in her; uneducated and
unpretending as she was, she was distinguished for patience,
forbearance, and sweetness. These, with all their train of qualities
peculiarly English, would never again be revived for us. This type of
all that was most worthy of admiration in her class among my
countrywomen, was placed under the sod of desert France; and it was as
a second separation from our country to have lost sight of her for
ever.

The Countess of Windsor died during our abode at Dijon. One morning I
was informed that she wished to see me. Her message made me remember,
that several days had elapsed since I had last seen her. Such a
circumstance had often occurred during our journey, when I remained
behind to watch to their close the last moments of some one of our
hapless comrades, and the rest of the troop past on before me. But
there was something in the manner of her messenger, that made me
suspect that all was not right. A caprice of the imagination caused me
to conjecture that some ill had occurred to Clara or Evelyn, rather
than to this aged lady. Our fears, for ever on the stretch, demanded a
nourishment of horror; and it seemed too natural an occurrence, too
like past times, for the old to die before the young. I found the
venerable mother of my Idris lying on a couch, her tall emaciated
figure stretched out; her face fallen away, from which the nose stood
out in sharp profile, and her large dark eyes, hollow and deep, gleamed
with such light as may edge a thunder cloud at sun-set. All was
shrivelled and dried up, except these lights; her voice too was
fearfully changed, as she spoke to me at intervals. “I am afraid,” said
she, “that it is selfish in me to have asked you to visit the old woman
again, before she dies: yet perhaps it would have been a greater shock
to hear suddenly that I was dead, than to see me first thus.”

I clasped her shrivelled hand: “Are you indeed so ill?” I asked.

“Do you not perceive death in my face,” replied she, “it is strange; I
ought to have expected this, and yet I confess it has taken me unaware.
I never clung to life, or enjoyed it, till these last months, while
among those I senselessly deserted: and it is hard to be snatched
immediately away. I am glad, however, that I am not a victim of the
plague; probably I should have died at this hour, though the world had
continued as it was in my youth.”

She spoke with difficulty, and I perceived that she regretted the
necessity of death, even more than she cared to confess. Yet she had
not to complain of an undue shortening of existence; her faded person
shewed that life had naturally spent itself. We had been alone at
first; now Clara entered; the Countess turned to her with a smile, and
took the hand of this lovely child; her roseate palm and snowy fingers,
contrasted with relaxed fibres and yellow hue of those of her aged
friend; she bent to kiss her, touching her withered mouth with the
warm, full lips of youth. “Verney,” said the Countess, “I need not
recommend this dear girl to you, for your own sake you will preserve
her. Were the world as it was, I should have a thousand sage
precautions to impress, that one so sensitive, good, and beauteous,
might escape the dangers that used to lurk for the destruction of the
fair and excellent. This is all nothing now.

“I commit you, my kind nurse, to your uncle’s care; to yours I entrust
the dearest relic of my better self. Be to Adrian, sweet one, what you
have been to me—enliven his sadness with your sprightly sallies; sooth
his anguish by your sober and inspired converse, when he is dying;
nurse him as you have done me.”

Clara burst into tears; “Kind girl,” said the Countess, “do not weep
for me. Many dear friends are left to you.”

“And yet,” cried Clara, “you talk of their dying also. This is indeed
cruel —how could I live, if they were gone? If it were possible for my
beloved protector to die before me, I could not nurse him; I could only
die too.”

The venerable lady survived this scene only twenty-four hours. She was
the last tie binding us to the ancient state of things. It was
impossible to look on her, and not call to mind in their wonted guise,
events and persons, as alien to our present situation as the disputes
of Themistocles and Aristides, or the wars of the two roses in our
native land. The crown of England had pressed her brow; the memory of
my father and his misfortunes, the vain struggles of the late king, the
images of Raymond, Evadne, and Perdita, who had lived in the world’s
prime, were brought vividly before us. We consigned her to the
oblivious tomb with reluctance; and when I turned from her grave, Janus
veiled his retrospective face; that which gazed on future generations
had long lost its faculty.

After remaining a week at Dijon, until thirty of our number deserted
the vacant ranks of life, we continued our way towards Geneva. At noon
on the second day we arrived at the foot of Jura. We halted here during
the heat of the day. Here fifty human beings—fifty, the only human
beings that survived of the food-teeming earth, assembled to read in
the looks of each other ghastly plague, or wasting sorrow, desperation,
or worse, carelessness of future or present evil. Here we assembled at
the foot of this mighty wall of mountain, under a spreading walnut
tree; a brawling stream refreshed the green sward by its sprinkling;
and the busy grasshopper chirped among the thyme. We clustered together
a group of wretched sufferers. A mother cradled in her enfeebled arms
the child, last of many, whose glazed eye was about to close for ever.
Here beauty, late glowing in youthful lustre and consciousness, now wan
and neglected, knelt fanning with uncertain motion the beloved, who lay
striving to paint his features, distorted by illness, with a thankful
smile. There an hard-featured, weather-worn veteran, having prepared
his meal, sat, his head dropped on his breast, the useless knife
falling from his grasp, his limbs utterly relaxed, as thought of wife
and child, and dearest relative, all lost, passed across his
recollection. There sat a man who for forty years had basked in
fortune’s tranquil sunshine; he held the hand of his last hope, his
beloved daughter, who had just attained womanhood; and he gazed on her
with anxious eyes, while she tried to rally her fainting spirit to
comfort him. Here a servant, faithful to the last, though dying, waited
on one, who, though still erect with health, gazed with gasping fear on
the variety of woe around.

Adrian stood leaning against a tree; he held a book in his hand, but
his eye wandered from the pages, and sought mine; they mingled a
sympathetic glance; his looks confessed that his thoughts had quitted
the inanimate print, for pages more pregnant with meaning, more
absorbing, spread out before him. By the margin of the stream, apart
from all, in a tranquil nook, where the purling brook kissed the green
sward gently, Clara and Evelyn were at play, sometimes beating the
water with large boughs, sometimes watching the summer-flies that
sported upon it. Evelyn now chased a butterfly—now gathered a flower
for his cousin; and his laughing cherub-face and clear brow told of the
light heart that beat in his bosom. Clara, though she endeavoured to
give herself up to his amusement, often forgot him, as she turned to
observe Adrian and me. She was now fourteen, and retained her childish
appearance, though in height a woman; she acted the part of the
tenderest mother to my little orphan boy; to see her playing with him,
or attending silently and submissively on our wants, you thought only
of her admirable docility and patience; but, in her soft eyes, and the
veined curtains that veiled them, in the clearness of her marmoreal
brow, and the tender expression of her lips, there was an intelligence
and beauty that at once excited admiration and love.

When the sun had sunk towards the precipitate west, and the evening
shadows grew long, we prepared to ascend the mountain. The attention
that we were obliged to pay to the sick, made our progress slow. The
winding road, though steep, presented a confined view of rocky fields
and hills, each hiding the other, till our farther ascent disclosed
them in succession. We were seldom shaded from the declining sun, whose
slant beams were instinct with exhausting heat. There are times when
minor difficulties grow gigantic —times, when as the Hebrew poet
expressively terms it, “the grasshopper is a burthen;” so was it with
our ill fated party this evening. Adrian, usually the first to rally
his spirits, and dash foremost into fatigue and hardship, with relaxed
limbs and declined head, the reins hanging loosely in his grasp, left
the choice of the path to the instinct of his horse, now and then
painfully rousing himself, when the steepness of the ascent required
that he should keep his seat with better care. Fear and horror
encompassed me. Did his languid air attest that he also was struck with
contagion? How long, when I look on this matchless specimen of
mortality, may I perceive that his thought answers mine? how long will
those limbs obey the kindly spirit within? how long will light and life
dwell in the eyes of this my sole remaining friend? Thus pacing slowly,
each hill surmounted, only presented another to be ascended; each
jutting corner only discovered another, sister to the last, endlessly.
Sometimes the pressure of sickness in one among us, caused the whole
cavalcade to halt; the call for water, the eagerly expressed wish to
repose; the cry of pain, and suppressed sob of the mourner—such were
the sorrowful attendants of our passage of the Jura.

Adrian had gone first. I saw him, while I was detained by the loosening
of a girth, struggling with the upward path, seemingly more difficult
than any we had yet passed. He reached the top, and the dark outline of
his figure stood in relief against the sky. He seemed to behold
something unexpected and wonderful; for, pausing, his head stretched
out, his arms for a moment extended, he seemed to give an All Hail! to
some new vision. Urged by curiosity, I hurried to join him. After
battling for many tedious minutes with the precipice, the same scene
presented itself to me, which had wrapt him in extatic wonder.

Nature, or nature’s favourite, this lovely earth, presented her most
unrivalled beauties in resplendent and sudden exhibition. Below, far,
far below, even as it were in the yawning abyss of the ponderous globe,
lay the placid and azure expanse of lake Leman; vine-covered hills
hedged it in, and behind dark mountains in cone-like shape, or
irregular cyclopean wall, served for further defence. But beyond, and
high above all, as if the spirits of the air had suddenly unveiled
their bright abodes, placed in scaleless altitude in the stainless sky,
heaven-kissing, companions of the unattainable ether, were the glorious
Alps, clothed in dazzling robes of light by the setting sun. And, as if
the world’s wonders were never to be exhausted, their vast immensities,
their jagged crags, and roseate painting, appeared again in the lake
below, dipping their proud heights beneath the unruffled waves—palaces
for the Naiads of the placid waters. Towns and villages lay scattered
at the foot of Jura, which, with dark ravine, and black promontories,
stretched its roots into the watery expanse beneath. Carried away by
wonder, I forgot the death of man, and the living and beloved friend
near me. When I turned, I saw tears streaming from his eyes; his thin
hands pressed one against the other, his animated countenance beaming
with admiration; “Why,” cried he, at last, “Why, oh heart, whisperest
thou of grief to me? Drink in the beauty of that scene, and possess
delight beyond what a fabled paradise could afford.”

By degrees, our whole party surmounting the steep, joined us, not one
among them, but gave visible tokens of admiration, surpassing any
before experienced. One cried, “God reveals his heaven to us; we may
die blessed.” Another and another, with broken exclamations, and
extravagant phrases, endeavoured to express the intoxicating effect of
this wonder of nature. So we remained awhile, lightened of the pressing
burthen of fate, forgetful of death, into whose night we were about to
plunge; no longer reflecting that our eyes now and for ever were and
would be the only ones which might perceive the divine magnificence of
this terrestrial exhibition. An enthusiastic transport, akin to
happiness, burst, like a sudden ray from the sun, on our darkened life.
Precious attribute of woe-worn humanity! that can snatch extatic
emotion, even from under the very share and harrow, that ruthlessly
ploughs up and lays waste every hope.

This evening was marked by another event. Passing through Ferney in our
way to Geneva, unaccustomed sounds of music arose from the rural church
which stood embosomed in trees, surrounded by smokeless, vacant
cottages. The peal of an organ with rich swell awoke the mute air,
lingering along, and mingling with the intense beauty that clothed the
rocks and woods, and waves around. Music—the language of the immortals,
disclosed to us as testimony of their existence—music, “silver key of
the fountain of tears,” child of love, soother of grief, inspirer of
heroism and radiant thoughts, O music, in this our desolation, we had
forgotten thee! Nor pipe at eve cheered us, nor harmony of voice, nor
linked thrill of string; thou camest upon us now, like the revealing of
other forms of being; and transported as we had been by the loveliness
of nature, fancying that we beheld the abode of spirits, now we might
well imagine that we heard their melodious communings. We paused in
such awe as would seize on a pale votarist, visiting some holy shrine
at midnight; if she beheld animated and smiling, the image which she
worshipped. We all stood mute; many knelt. In a few minutes however, we
were recalled to human wonder and sympathy by a familiar strain. The
air was Haydn’s “New-Created World,” and, old and drooping as humanity
had become, the world yet fresh as at creation’s day, might still be
worthily celebrated by such an hymn of praise. Adrian and I entered the
church; the nave was empty, though the smoke of incense rose from the
altar, bringing with it the recollection of vast congregations, in once
thronged cathedrals; we went into the loft. A blind old man sat at the
bellows; his whole soul was ear; and as he sat in the attitude of
attentive listening, a bright glow of pleasure was diffused over his
countenance; for, though his lack-lustre eye could not reflect the
beam, yet his parted lips, and every line of his face and venerable
brow spoke delight. A young woman sat at the keys, perhaps twenty years
of age. Her auburn hair hung on her neck, and her fair brow shone in
its own beauty; but her drooping eyes let fall fast-flowing tears,
while the constraint she exercised to suppress her sobs, and still her
trembling, flushed her else pale cheek; she was thin; languor, and
alas! sickness, bent her form. We stood looking at the pair, forgetting
what we heard in the absorbing sight; till, the last chord struck, the
peal died away in lessening reverberations. The mighty voice, inorganic
we might call it, for we could in no way associate it with mechanism of
pipe or key, stilled its sonorous tone, and the girl, turning to lend
her assistance to her aged companion, at length perceived us.

It was her father; and she, since childhood, had been the guide of his
darkened steps. They were Germans from Saxony, and, emigrating thither
but a few years before, had formed new ties with the surrounding
villagers. About the time that the pestilence had broken out, a young
German student had joined them. Their simple history was easily
divined. He, a noble, loved the fair daughter of the poor musician, and
followed them in their flight from the persecutions of his friends; but
soon the mighty leveller came with unblunted scythe to mow, together
with the grass, the tall flowers of the field. The youth was an early
victim. She preserved herself for her father’s sake. His blindness
permitted her to continue a delusion, at first the child of
accident—and now solitary beings, sole survivors in the land, he
remained unacquainted with the change, nor was aware that when he
listened to his child’s music, the mute mountains, senseless lake, and
unconscious trees, were, himself excepted, her sole auditors.

The very day that we arrived she had been attacked by symptomatic
illness. She was paralyzed with horror at the idea of leaving her aged,
sightless father alone on the empty earth; but she had not courage to
disclose the truth, and the very excess of her desperation animated her
to surpassing exertions. At the accustomed vesper hour, she led him to
the chapel; and, though trembling and weeping on his account, she
played, without fault in time, or error in note, the hymn written to
celebrate the creation of the adorned earth, soon to be her tomb.

We came to her like visitors from heaven itself; her high-wrought
courage; her hardly sustained firmness, fled with the appearance of
relief. With a shriek she rushed towards us, embraced the knees of
Adrian, and uttering but the words, “O save my father!” with sobs and
hysterical cries, opened the long-shut floodgates of her woe.

Poor girl!—she and her father now lie side by side, beneath the high
walnut-tree where her lover reposes, and which in her dying moments she
had pointed out to us. Her father, at length aware of his daughter’s
danger, unable to see the changes of her dear countenance, obstinately
held her hand, till it was chilled and stiffened by death. Nor did he
then move or speak, till, twelve hours after, kindly death took him to
his breakless repose. They rest beneath the sod, the tree their
monument;—the hallowed spot is distinct in my memory, paled in by
craggy Jura, and the far, immeasurable Alps; the spire of the church
they frequented still points from out the embosoming trees; and though
her hand be cold, still methinks the sounds of divine music which they
loved wander about, solacing their gentle ghosts.

 [24] Burke’s Reflections on the French Revolution.




CHAPTER VIII.


We had now reached Switzerland, so long the final mark and aim of our
exertions. We had looked, I know not wherefore, with hope and pleasing
expectation on her congregation of hills and snowy crags, and opened
our bosoms with renewed spirits to the icy Biz, which even at Midsummer
used to come from the northern glacier laden with cold. Yet how could
we nourish expectation of relief? Like our native England, and the vast
extent of fertile France, this mountain-embowered land was desolate of
its inhabitants. Nor bleak mountain-top, nor snow-nourished rivulet;
not the ice-laden Biz, nor thunder, the tamer of contagion, had
preserved them— why therefore should we claim exemption?

Who was there indeed to save? What troop had we brought fit to stand at
bay, and combat with the conqueror? We were a failing remnant, tamed to
mere submission to the coming blow. A train half dead, through fear of
death—a hopeless, unresisting, almost reckless crew, which, in the
tossed bark of life, had given up all pilotage, and resigned themselves
to the destructive force of ungoverned winds. Like a few furrows of
unreaped corn, which, left standing on a wide field after the rest is
gathered to the garner, are swiftly borne down by the winter storm.
Like a few straggling swallows, which, remaining after their fellows
had, on the first unkind breath of passing autumn, migrated to genial
climes, were struck to earth by the first frost of November. Like a
stray sheep that wanders over the sleet-beaten hill-side, while the
flock is in the pen, and dies before morning-dawn. Like a cloud, like
one of many that were spread in impenetrable woof over the sky, which,
when the shepherd north has driven its companions “to drink Antipodean
noon,” fades and dissolves in the clear ether—Such were we!

We left the fair margin of the beauteous lake of Geneva, and entered
the Alpine ravines; tracing to its source the brawling Arve, through
the rock-bound valley of Servox, beside the mighty waterfalls, and
under the shadow of the inaccessible mountains, we travelled on; while
the luxuriant walnut-tree gave place to the dark pine, whose musical
branches swung in the wind, and whose upright forms had braved a
thousand storms—till the verdant sod, the flowery dell, and shrubbery
hill were exchanged for the sky-piercing, untrodden, seedless rock,
“the bones of the world, waiting to be clothed with every thing
necessary to give life and beauty.”[25] Strange that we should seek
shelter here! Surely, if, in those countries where earth was wont, like
a tender mother, to nourish her children, we had found her a destroyer,
we need not seek it here, where stricken by keen penury she seems to
shudder through her stony veins. Nor were we mistaken in our
conjecture. We vainly sought the vast and ever moving glaciers of
Chamounix, rifts of pendant ice, seas of congelated waters, the
leafless groves of tempest-battered pines, dells, mere paths for the
loud avalanche, and hill-tops, the resort of thunder-storms. Pestilence
reigned paramount even here. By the time that day and night, like twin
sisters of equal growth, shared equally their dominion over the hours,
one by one, beneath the ice-caves, beside the waters springing from the
thawed snows of a thousand winters, another and yet another of the
remnant of the race of Man, closed their eyes for ever to the light.

Yet we were not quite wrong in seeking a scene like this, whereon to
close the drama. Nature, true to the last, consoled us in the very
heart of misery. Sublime grandeur of outward objects soothed our
hapless hearts, and were in harmony with our desolation. Many sorrows
have befallen man during his chequered course; and many a woe-stricken
mourner has found himself sole survivor among many. Our misery took its
majestic shape and colouring from the vast ruin, that accompanied and
made one with it. Thus on lovely earth, many a dark ravine contains a
brawling stream, shadowed by romantic rocks, threaded by mossy
paths—but all, except this, wanted the mighty back-ground, the towering
Alps, whose snowy capes, or bared ridges, lifted us from our dull
mortal abode, to the palaces of Nature’s own.

This solemn harmony of event and situation regulated our feelings, and
gave as it were fitting costume to our last act. Majestic gloom and
tragic pomp attended the decease of wretched humanity. The funeral
procession of monarchs of old, was transcended by our splendid shews.
Near the sources of the Arveiron we performed the rites for, four only
excepted, the last of the species. Adrian and I, leaving Clara and
Evelyn wrapt in peaceful unobserving slumber, carried the body to this
desolate spot, and placed it in those caves of ice beneath the glacier,
which rive and split with the slightest sound, and bring destruction on
those within the clefts—no bird or beast of prey could here profane the
frozen form. So, with hushed steps and in silence, we placed the dead
on a bier of ice, and then, departing, stood on the rocky platform
beside the river springs. All hushed as we had been, the very striking
of the air with our persons had sufficed to disturb the repose of this
thawless region; and we had hardly left the cavern, before vast blocks
of ice, detaching themselves from the roof, fell, and covered the human
image we had deposited within. We had chosen a fair moonlight night,
but our journey thither had been long, and the crescent sank behind the
western heights by the time we had accomplished our purpose. The snowy
mountains and blue glaciers shone in their own light. The rugged and
abrupt ravine, which formed one side of Mont Anvert, was opposite to
us, the glacier at our side; at our feet Arveiron, white and foaming,
dashed over the pointed rocks that jutted into it, and, with whirring
spray and ceaseless roar, disturbed the stilly night. Yellow lightnings
played around the vast dome of Mont Blanc, silent as the snow-clad rock
they illuminated; all was bare, wild, and sublime, while the singing of
the pines in melodious murmurings added a gentle interest to the rough
magnificence. Now the riving and fall of icy rocks clave the air; now
the thunder of the avalanche burst on our ears. In countries whose
features are of less magnitude, nature betrays her living powers in the
foliage of the trees, in the growth of herbage, in the soft purling of
meandering streams; here, endowed with giant attributes, the torrent,
the thunder-storm, and the flow of massive waters, display her
activity. Such the church-yard, such the requiem, such the eternal
congregation, that waited on our companion’s funeral!

Nor was it the human form alone which we had placed in this eternal
sepulchre, whose obsequies we now celebrated. With this last victim
Plague vanished from the earth. Death had never wanted weapons
wherewith to destroy life, and we, few and weak as we had become, were
still exposed to every other shaft with which his full quiver teemed.
But pestilence was absent from among them. For seven years it had had
full sway upon earth; she had trod every nook of our spacious globe;
she had mingled with the atmosphere, which as a cloak enwraps all our
fellow-creatures—the inhabitants of native Europe—the luxurious
Asiatic—the swarthy African and free American had been vanquished and
destroyed by her. Her barbarous tyranny came to its close here in the
rocky vale of Chamounix.

Still recurring scenes of misery and pain, the fruits of this
distemper, made no more a part of our lives—the word plague no longer
rung in our ears—the aspect of plague incarnate in the human
countenance no longer appeared before our eyes. From this moment I saw
plague no more. She abdicated her throne, and despoiled herself of her
imperial sceptre among the ice rocks that surrounded us. She left
solitude and silence co-heirs of her kingdom.

My present feelings are so mingled with the past, that I cannot say
whether the knowledge of this change visited us, as we stood on this
sterile spot. It seems to me that it did; that a cloud seemed to pass
from over us, that a weight was taken from the air; that henceforth we
breathed more freely, and raised our heads with some portion of former
liberty. Yet we did not hope. We were impressed by the sentiment, that
our race was run, but that plague would not be our destroyer. The
coming time was as a mighty river, down which a charmed boat is driven,
whose mortal steersman knows, that the obvious peril is not the one he
needs fear, yet that danger is nigh; and who floats awe-struck under
beetling precipices, through the dark and turbid waters—seeing in the
distance yet stranger and ruder shapes, towards which he is
irresistibly impelled. What would become of us? O for some Delphic
oracle, or Pythian maid, to utter the secrets of futurity! O for some
Œdipus to solve the riddle of the cruel Sphynx! Such Œdipus was I to
be—not divining a word’s juggle, but whose agonizing pangs, and
sorrow-tainted life were to be the engines, wherewith to lay bare the
secrets of destiny, and reveal the meaning of the enigma, whose
explanation closed the history of the human race.

Dim fancies, akin to these, haunted our minds, and instilled feelings
not unallied to pleasure, as we stood beside this silent tomb of
nature, reared by these lifeless mountains, above her living veins,
choking her vital principle. “Thus are we left,” said Adrian, “two
melancholy blasted trees, where once a forest waved. We are left to
mourn, and pine, and die. Yet even now we have our duties, which we
must string ourselves to fulfil: the duty of bestowing pleasure where
we can, and by force of love, irradiating with rainbow hues the tempest
of grief. Nor will I repine if in this extremity we preserve what we
now possess. Something tells me, Verney, that we need no longer dread
our cruel enemy, and I cling with delight to the oracular voice. Though
strange, it will be sweet to mark the growth of your little boy, and
the development of Clara’s young heart. In the midst of a desert world,
we are everything to them; and, if we live, it must be our task to make
this new mode of life happy to them. At present this is easy, for their
childish ideas do not wander into futurity, and the stinging craving
for sympathy, and all of love of which our nature is susceptible, is
not yet awake within them: we cannot guess what will happen then, when
nature asserts her indefeasible and sacred powers; but, long before
that time, we may all be cold, as he who lies in yonder tomb of ice. We
need only provide for the present, and endeavour to fill with pleasant
images the inexperienced fancy of your lovely niece. The scenes which
now surround us, vast and sublime as they are, are not such as can best
contribute to this work. Nature is here like our fortunes, grand, but
too destructive, bare, and rude, to be able to afford delight to her
young imagination. Let us descend to the sunny plains of Italy. Winter
will soon be here, to clothe this wilderness in double desolation; but
we will cross the bleak hill-tops, and lead her to scenes of fertility
and beauty, where her path will be adorned with flowers, and the cheery
atmosphere inspire pleasure and hope.”

In pursuance of this plan we quitted Chamounix on the following day. We
had no cause to hasten our steps; no event was transacted beyond our
actual sphere to enchain our resolves, so we yielded to every idle
whim, and deemed our time well spent, when we could behold the passage
of the hours without dismay. We loitered along the lovely Vale of
Servox; passed long hours on the bridge, which, crossing the ravine of
Arve, commands a prospect of its pine-clothed depths, and the snowy
mountains that wall it in. We rambled through romantic Switzerland;
till, fear of coming winter leading us forward, the first days of
October found us in the valley of La Maurienne, which leads to Cenis. I
cannot explain the reluctance we felt at leaving this land of
mountains; perhaps it was, that we regarded the Alps as boundaries
between our former and our future state of existence, and so clung
fondly to what of old we had loved. Perhaps, because we had now so few
impulses urging to a choice between two modes of action, we were
pleased to preserve the existence of one, and preferred the prospect of
what we were to do, to the recollection of what had been done. We felt
that for this year danger was past; and we believed that, for some
months, we were secured to each other. There was a thrilling, agonizing
delight in the thought—it filled the eyes with misty tears, it tore the
heart with tumultuous heavings; frailer than the “snow fall in the
river,” were we each and all—but we strove to give life and
individuality to the meteoric course of our several existences, and to
feel that no moment escaped us unenjoyed. Thus tottering on the dizzy
brink, we were happy. Yes! as we sat beneath the toppling rocks, beside
the waterfalls, near

—Forests, ancient as the hills,
And folding sunny spots of greenery,


where the chamois grazed, and the timid squirrel laid up its
hoard—descanting on the charms of nature, drinking in the while her
unalienable beauties—we were, in an empty world, happy.

Yet, O days of joy—days, when eye spoke to eye, and voices, sweeter
than the music of the swinging branches of the pines, or rivulet’s
gentle murmur, answered mine—yet, O days replete with beatitude, days
of loved society—days unutterably dear to me forlorn—pass, O pass
before me, making me in your memory forget what I am. Behold, how my
streaming eyes blot this senseless paper—behold, how my features are
convulsed by agonizing throes, at your mere recollection, now that,
alone, my tears flow, my lips quiver, my cries fill the air, unseen,
unmarked, unheard! Yet, O yet, days of delight! let me dwell on your
long-drawn hours!

As the cold increased upon us, we passed the Alps, and descended into
Italy. At the uprising of morn, we sat at our repast, and cheated our
regrets by gay sallies or learned disquisitions. The live-long day we
sauntered on, still keeping in view the end of our journey, but
careless of the hour of its completion. As the evening star shone out,
and the orange sunset, far in the west, marked the position of the dear
land we had for ever left, talk, thought enchaining, made the hours
fly—O that we had lived thus for ever and for ever! Of what consequence
was it to our four hearts, that they alone were the fountains of life
in the wide world? As far as mere individual sentiment was concerned,
we had rather be left thus united together, than if, each alone in a
populous desert of unknown men, we had wandered truly companionless
till life’s last term. In this manner, we endeavoured to console each
other; in this manner, true philosophy taught us to reason.

It was the delight of Adrian and myself to wait on Clara, naming her
the little queen of the world, ourselves her humblest servitors. When
we arrived at a town, our first care was to select for her its most
choice abode; to make sure that no harrowing relic remained of its
former inhabitants; to seek food for her, and minister to her wants
with assiduous tenderness. Clara entered into our scheme with childish
gaiety. Her chief business was to attend on Evelyn; but it was her
sport to array herself in splendid robes, adorn herself with sunny
gems, and ape a princely state. Her religion, deep and pure, did not
teach her to refuse to blunt thus the keen sting of regret; her
youthful vivacity made her enter, heart and soul, into these strange
masquerades.

We had resolved to pass the ensuing winter at Milan, which, as being a
large and luxurious city, would afford us choice of homes. We had
descended the Alps, and left far behind their vast forests and mighty
crags. We entered smiling Italy. Mingled grass and corn grew in her
plains, the unpruned vines threw their luxuriant branches around the
elms. The grapes, overripe, had fallen on the ground, or hung purple,
or burnished green, among the red and yellow leaves. The ears of
standing corn winnowed to emptiness by the spendthrift winds; the
fallen foliage of the trees, the weed-grown brooks, the dusky olive,
now spotted with its blackened fruit; the chestnuts, to which the
squirrel only was harvest-man; all plenty, and yet, alas! all poverty,
painted in wondrous hues and fantastic groupings this land of beauty.
In the towns, in the voiceless towns, we visited the churches, adorned
by pictures, master-pieces of art, or galleries of statues—while in
this genial clime the animals, in new found liberty, rambled through
the gorgeous palaces, and hardly feared our forgotten aspect. The
dove-coloured oxen turned their full eyes on us, and paced slowly by; a
startling throng of silly sheep, with pattering feet, would start up in
some chamber, formerly dedicated to the repose of beauty, and rush,
huddling past us, down the marble staircase into the street, and again
in at the first open door, taking unrebuked possession of hallowed
sanctuary, or kingly council-chamber. We no longer started at these
occurrences, nor at worse exhibition of change—when the palace had
become a mere tomb, pregnant with fetid stench, strewn with the dead;
and we could perceive how pestilence and fear had played strange
antics, chasing the luxurious dame to the dank fields and bare cottage;
gathering, among carpets of Indian woof, and beds of silk, the rough
peasant, or the deformed half-human shape of the wretched beggar.

We arrived at Milan, and stationed ourselves in the Vice-Roy’s palace.
Here we made laws for ourselves, dividing our day, and fixing distinct
occupations for each hour. In the morning we rode in the adjoining
country, or wandered through the palaces, in search of pictures or
antiquities. In the evening we assembled to read or to converse. There
were few books that we dared read; few, that did not cruelly deface the
painting we bestowed on our solitude, by recalling combinations and
emotions never more to be experienced by us. Metaphysical disquisition;
fiction, which wandering from all reality, lost itself in self-created
errors; poets of times so far gone by, that to read of them was as to
read of Atlantis and Utopia; or such as referred to nature only, and
the workings of one particular mind; but most of all, talk, varied and
ever new, beguiled our hours.

While we paused thus in our onward career towards death, time held on
its accustomed course. Still and for ever did the earth roll on,
enthroned in her atmospheric car, speeded by the force of the invisible
coursers of never-erring necessity. And now, this dew-drop in the sky,
this ball, ponderous with mountains, lucent with waves, passing from
the short tyranny of watery Pisces and the frigid Ram, entered the
radiant demesne of Taurus and the Twins. There, fanned by vernal airs,
the Spirit of Beauty sprung from her cold repose; and, with winnowing
wings and soft pacing feet, set a girdle of verdure around the earth,
sporting among the violets, hiding within the springing foliage of the
trees, tripping lightly down the radiant streams into the sunny deep.
“For lo! winter is past, the rain is over and gone; the flowers appear
on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice
of the turtle is heard in our land; the fig tree putteth forth her
green figs, and the vines, with the tender grape, give a good
smell.”[26] Thus was it in the time of the ancient regal poet; thus was
it now.

Yet how could we miserable hail the approach of this delightful season?
We hoped indeed that death did not now as heretofore walk in its
shadow; yet, left as we were alone to each other, we looked in each
other’s faces with enquiring eyes, not daring altogether to trust to
our presentiments, and endeavouring to divine which would be the
hapless survivor to the other three. We were to pass the summer at the
lake of Como, and thither we removed as soon as spring grew to her
maturity, and the snow disappeared from the hill tops. Ten miles from
Como, under the steep heights of the eastern mountains, by the margin
of the lake, was a villa called the Pliniana, from its being built on
the site of a fountain, whose periodical ebb and flow is described by
the younger Pliny in his letters. The house had nearly fallen into
ruin, till in the year 2090, an English nobleman had bought it, and
fitted it up with every luxury. Two large halls, hung with splendid
tapestry, and paved with marble, opened on each side of a court, of
whose two other sides one overlooked the deep dark lake, and the other
was bounded by a mountain, from whose stony side gushed, with roar and
splash, the celebrated fountain. Above, underwood of myrtle and tufts
of odorous plants crowned the rock, while the star-pointing giant
cypresses reared themselves in the blue air, and the recesses of the
hills were adorned with the luxuriant growth of chestnut-trees. Here we
fixed our summer residence. We had a lovely skiff, in which we sailed,
now stemming the midmost waves, now coasting the over-hanging and
craggy banks, thick sown with evergreens, which dipped their shining
leaves in the waters, and were mirrored in many a little bay and creek
of waters of translucent darkness. Here orange plants bloomed, here
birds poured forth melodious hymns; and here, during spring, the cold
snake emerged from the clefts, and basked on the sunny terraces of
rock.

Were we not happy in this paradisiacal retreat? If some kind spirit had
whispered forgetfulness to us, methinks we should have been happy here,
where the precipitous mountains, nearly pathless, shut from our view
the far fields of desolate earth, and with small exertion of the
imagination, we might fancy that the cities were still resonant with
popular hum, and the peasant still guided his plough through the
furrow, and that we, the world’s free denizens, enjoyed a voluntary
exile, and not a remediless cutting off from our extinct species.

Not one among us enjoyed the beauty of this scenery so much as Clara.
Before we quitted Milan, a change had taken place in her habits and
manners. She lost her gaiety, she laid aside her sports, and assumed an
almost vestal plainness of attire. She shunned us, retiring with Evelyn
to some distant chamber or silent nook; nor did she enter into his
pastimes with the same zest as she was wont, but would sit and watch
him with sadly tender smiles, and eyes bright with tears, yet without a
word of complaint. She approached us timidly, avoided our caresses, nor
shook off her embarrassment till some serious discussion or lofty theme
called her for awhile out of herself. Her beauty grew as a rose, which,
opening to the summer wind, discloses leaf after leaf till the sense
aches with its excess of loveliness. A slight and variable colour
tinged her cheeks, and her motions seemed attuned by some hidden
harmony of surpassing sweetness. We redoubled our tenderness and
earnest attentions. She received them with grateful smiles, that fled
swift as sunny beam from a glittering wave on an April day.

Our only acknowledged point of sympathy with her, appeared to be
Evelyn. This dear little fellow was a comforter and delight to us
beyond all words. His buoyant spirit, and his innocent ignorance of our
vast calamity, were balm to us, whose thoughts and feelings were
over-wrought and spun out in the immensity of speculative sorrow. To
cherish, to caress, to amuse him was the common task of all. Clara, who
felt towards him in some degree like a young mother, gratefully
acknowledged our kindness towards him. To me, O! to me, who saw the
clear brows and soft eyes of the beloved of my heart, my lost and ever
dear Idris, re-born in his gentle face, to me he was dear even to pain;
if I pressed him to my heart, methought I clasped a real and living
part of her, who had lain there through long years of youthful
happiness.

It was the custom of Adrian and myself to go out each day in our skiff
to forage in the adjacent country. In these expeditions we were seldom
accompanied by Clara or her little charge, but our return was an hour
of hilarity. Evelyn ransacked our stores with childish eagerness, and
we always brought some new found gift for our fair companion. Then too
we made discoveries of lovely scenes or gay palaces, whither in the
evening we all proceeded. Our sailing expeditions were most divine, and
with a fair wind or transverse course we cut the liquid waves; and, if
talk failed under the pressure of thought, I had my clarionet with me,
which awoke the echoes, and gave the change to our careful minds. Clara
at such times often returned to her former habits of free converse and
gay sally; and though our four hearts alone beat in the world, those
four hearts were happy.

One day, on our return from the town of Como, with a laden boat, we
expected as usual to be met at the port by Clara and Evelyn, and we
were somewhat surprised to see the beach vacant. I, as my nature
prompted, would not prognosticate evil, but explained it away as a mere
casual incident. Not so Adrian. He was seized with sudden trembling and
apprehension, and he called to me with vehemence to steer quickly for
land, and, when near, leapt from the boat, half falling into the water;
and, scrambling up the steep bank, hastened along the narrow strip of
garden, the only level space between the lake and the mountain. I
followed without delay; the garden and inner court were empty, so was
the house, whose every room we visited. Adrian called loudly upon
Clara’s name, and was about to rush up the near mountain-path, when the
door of a summer-house at the end of the garden slowly opened, and
Clara appeared, not advancing towards us, but leaning against a column
of the building with blanched cheeks, in a posture of utter
despondency. Adrian sprang towards her with a cry of joy, and folded
her delightedly in his arms. She withdrew from his embrace, and,
without a word, again entered the summer-house. Her quivering lips, her
despairing heart refused to afford her voice to express our misfortune.
Poor little Evelyn had, while playing with her, been seized with sudden
fever, and now lay torpid and speechless on a little couch in the
summer-house.

For a whole fortnight we unceasingly watched beside the poor child, as
his life declined under the ravages of a virulent typhus. His little
form and tiny lineaments encaged the embryo of the world-spanning mind
of man. Man’s nature, brimful of passions and affections, would have
had an home in that little heart, whose swift pulsations hurried
towards their close. His small hand’s fine mechanism, now flaccid and
unbent, would in the growth of sinew and muscle, have achieved works of
beauty or of strength. His tender rosy feet would have trod in firm
manhood the bowers and glades of earth— these reflections were now of
little use: he lay, thought and strength suspended, waiting unresisting
the final blow.

We watched at his bedside, and when the access of fever was on him, we
neither spoke nor looked at each other, marking only his obstructed
breath and the mortal glow that tinged his sunken cheek, the heavy
death that weighed on his eyelids. It is a trite evasion to say, that
words could not express our long drawn agony; yet how can words image
sensations, whose tormenting keenness throw us back, as it were, on the
deep roots and hidden foundations of our nature, which shake our being
with earth-quake-throe, so that we leave to confide in accustomed
feelings which like mother-earth support us, and cling to some vain
imagination or deceitful hope, which will soon be buried in the ruins
occasioned by the final shock. I have called that period a fortnight,
which we passed watching the changes of the sweet child’s malady—and
such it might have been—at night, we wondered to find another day gone,
while each particular hour seemed endless. Day and night were exchanged
for one another uncounted; we slept hardly at all, nor did we even quit
his room, except when a pang of grief seized us, and we retired from
each other for a short period to conceal our sobs and tears. We
endeavoured in vain to abstract Clara from this deplorable scene. She
sat, hour after hour, looking at him, now softly arranging his pillow,
and, while he had power to swallow, administered his drink. At length
the moment of his death came: the blood paused in its flow —his eyes
opened, and then closed again: without convulsion or sigh, the frail
tenement was left vacant of its spiritual inhabitant.

I have heard that the sight of the dead has confirmed materialists in
their belief. I ever felt otherwise. Was that my child—that moveless
decaying inanimation? My child was enraptured by my caresses; his dear
voice cloathed with meaning articulations his thoughts, otherwise
inaccessible; his smile was a ray of the soul, and the same soul sat
upon its throne in his eyes. I turn from this mockery of what he was.
Take, O earth, thy debt! freely and for ever I consign to thee the garb
thou didst afford. But thou, sweet child, amiable and beloved boy,
either thy spirit has sought a fitter dwelling, or, shrined in my
heart, thou livest while it lives.

We placed his remains under a cypress, the upright mountain being
scooped out to receive them. And then Clara said, “If you wish me to
live, take me from hence. There is something in this scene of
transcendent beauty, in these trees, and hills and waves, that for ever
whisper to me, leave thy cumbrous flesh, and make a part of us. I
earnestly entreat you to take me away.”

So on the fifteenth of August we bade adieu to our villa, and the
embowering shades of this abode of beauty; to calm bay and noisy
waterfall; to Evelyn’s little grave we bade farewell! and then, with
heavy hearts, we departed on our pilgrimage towards Rome.

 [25] Mary Wollstonecraft’s Letters from Norway.


 [26] Solomon’s Song.




CHAPTER IX.


Now—soft awhile—have I arrived so near the end? Yes! it is all over
now—a step or two over those new made graves, and the wearisome way is
done. Can I accomplish my task? Can I streak my paper with words
capacious of the grand conclusion? Arise, black Melancholy! quit thy
Cimmerian solitude! Bring with thee murky fogs from hell, which may
drink up the day; bring blight and pestiferous exhalations, which,
entering the hollow caverns and breathing places of earth, may fill her
stony veins with corruption, so that not only herbage may no longer
flourish, the trees may rot, and the rivers run with gall—but the
everlasting mountains be decomposed, and the mighty deep putrify, and
the genial atmosphere which clips the globe, lose all powers of
generation and sustenance. Do this, sad visaged power, while I write,
while eyes read these pages.

And who will read them? Beware, tender offspring of the re-born world—
beware, fair being, with human heart, yet untamed by care, and human
brow, yet unploughed by time—beware, lest the cheerful current of thy
blood be checked, thy golden locks turn grey, thy sweet dimpling smiles
be changed to fixed, harsh wrinkles! Let not day look on these lines,
lest garish day waste, turn pale, and die. Seek a cypress grove, whose
moaning boughs will be harmony befitting; seek some cave, deep
embowered in earth’s dark entrails, where no light will penetrate, save
that which struggles, red and flickering, through a single fissure,
staining thy page with grimmest livery of death.

There is a painful confusion in my brain, which refuses to delineate
distinctly succeeding events. Sometimes the irradiation of my friend’s
gentle smile comes before me; and methinks its light spans and fills
eternity—then, again, I feel the gasping throes—

We quitted Como, and in compliance with Adrian’s earnest desire, we
took Venice in our way to Rome. There was something to the English
peculiarly attractive in the idea of this wave-encircled,
island-enthroned city. Adrian had never seen it. We went down the Po
and the Brenta in a boat; and, the days proving intolerably hot, we
rested in the bordering palaces during the day, travelling through the
night, when darkness made the bordering banks indistinct, and our
solitude less remarkable; when the wandering moon lit the waves that
divided before our prow, and the night-wind filled our sails, and the
murmuring stream, waving trees, and swelling canvass, accorded in
harmonious strain. Clara, long overcome by excessive grief, had to a
great degree cast aside her timid, cold reserve, and received our
attentions with grateful tenderness. While Adrian with poetic fervour
discoursed of the glorious nations of the dead, of the beauteous earth
and the fate of man, she crept near him, drinking in his speech with
silent pleasure. We banished from our talk, and as much as possible
from our thoughts, the knowledge of our desolation. And it would be
incredible to an inhabitant of cities, to one among a busy throng, to
what extent we succeeded. It was as a man confined in a dungeon, whose
small and grated rift at first renders the doubtful light more sensibly
obscure, till, the visual orb having drunk in the beam, and adapted
itself to its scantiness, he finds that clear noon inhabits his cell.
So we, a simple triad on empty earth, were multiplied to each other,
till we became all in all. We stood like trees, whose roots are
loosened by the wind, which support one another, leaning and clinging
with encreased fervour while the wintry storms howl. Thus we floated
down the widening stream of the Po, sleeping when the cicale sang,
awake with the stars. We entered the narrower banks of the Brenta, and
arrived at the shore of the Laguna at sunrise on the sixth of
September. The bright orb slowly rose from behind its cupolas and
towers, and shed its penetrating light upon the glassy waters. Wrecks
of gondolas, and some few uninjured ones, were strewed on the beach at
Fusina. We embarked in one of these for the widowed daughter of ocean,
who, abandoned and fallen, sat forlorn on her propping isles, looking
towards the far mountains of Greece. We rowed lightly over the Laguna,
and entered Canale Grande. The tide ebbed sullenly from out the broken
portals and violated halls of Venice: sea weed and sea monsters were
left on the blackened marble, while the salt ooze defaced the matchless
works of art that adorned their walls, and the sea gull flew out from
the shattered window. In the midst of this appalling ruin of the
monuments of man’s power, nature asserted her ascendancy, and shone
more beauteous from the contrast. The radiant waters hardly trembled,
while the rippling waves made many sided mirrors to the sun; the blue
immensity, seen beyond Lido, stretched far, unspecked by boat, so
tranquil, so lovely, that it seemed to invite us to quit the land
strewn with ruins, and to seek refuge from sorrow and fear on its
placid extent.

We saw the ruins of this hapless city from the height of the tower of
San Marco, immediately under us, and turned with sickening hearts to
the sea, which, though it be a grave, rears no monument, discloses no
ruin. Evening had come apace. The sun set in calm majesty behind the
misty summits of the Apennines, and its golden and roseate hues painted
the mountains of the opposite shore. “That land,” said Adrian, “tinged
with the last glories of the day, is Greece.” Greece! The sound had a
responsive chord in the bosom of Clara. She vehemently reminded us that
we had promised to take her once again to Greece, to the tomb of her
parents. Why go to Rome? what should we do at Rome? We might take one
of the many vessels to be found here, embark in it, and steer right for
Albania.

I objected the dangers of ocean, and the distance of the mountains we
saw, from Athens; a distance which, from the savage uncultivation of
the country, was almost impassable. Adrian, who was delighted with
Clara’s proposal, obviated these objections. The season was favourable;
the north-west that blew would take us transversely across the gulph;
and then we might find, in some abandoned port, a light Greek caique,
adapted for such navigation, and run down the coast of the Morea, and,
passing over the Isthmus of Corinth, without much land-travelling or
fatigue, find ourselves at Athens. This appeared to me wild talk; but
the sea, glowing with a thousand purple hues, looked so brilliant and
safe; my beloved companions were so earnest, so determined, that, when
Adrian said, “Well, though it is not exactly what you wish, yet
consent, to please me”—I could no longer refuse. That evening we
selected a vessel, whose size just seemed fitted for our enterprize; we
bent the sails and put the rigging in order, and reposing that night in
one of the city’s thousand palaces, agreed to embark at sunrise the
following morning.

When winds that move not its calm surface, sweep
The azure sea, I love the land no more;
The smiles of the serene and tranquil deep
Tempt my unquiet mind—


Thus said Adrian, quoting a translation of Moschus’s poem, as in the
clear morning light, we rowed over the Laguna, past Lido, into the open
sea—I would have added in continuation,

        But when the roar
Of ocean’s gray abyss resounds, and foam
Gathers upon the sea, and vast waves burst—


But my friends declared that such verses were evil augury; so in
cheerful mood we left the shallow waters, and, when out at sea,
unfurled our sails to catch the favourable breeze. The laughing morning
air filled them, while sun-light bathed earth, sky and ocean—the placid
waves divided to receive our keel, and playfully kissed the dark sides
of our little skiff, murmuring a welcome; as land receded, still the
blue expanse, most waveless, twin sister to the azure empyrean,
afforded smooth conduct to our bark. As the air and waters were
tranquil and balmy, so were our minds steeped in quiet. In comparison
with the unstained deep, funereal earth appeared a grave, its high
rocks and stately mountains were but monuments, its trees the plumes of
a herse, the brooks and rivers brackish with tears for departed man.
Farewell to desolate towns —to fields with their savage intermixture of
corn and weeds—to ever multiplying relics of our lost species. Ocean,
we commit ourselves to thee —even as the patriarch of old floated above
the drowned world, let us be saved, as thus we betake ourselves to thy
perennial flood.

Adrian sat at the helm; I attended to the rigging, the breeze right aft
filled our swelling canvas, and we ran before it over the untroubled
deep. The wind died away at noon; its idle breath just permitted us to
hold our course. As lazy, fair-weather sailors, careless of the coming
hour, we talked gaily of our coasting voyage, of our arrival at Athens.
We would make our home of one of the Cyclades, and there in
myrtle-groves, amidst perpetual spring, fanned by the wholesome
sea-breezes—we would live long years in beatific union—Was there such a
thing as death in the world?—

The sun passed its zenith, and lingered down the stainless floor of
heaven. Lying in the boat, my face turned up to the sky, I thought I
saw on its blue white, marbled streaks, so slight, so immaterial, that
now I said— They are there—and now, It is a mere imagination. A sudden
fear stung me while I gazed; and, starting up, and running to the
prow,—as I stood, my hair was gently lifted on my brow—a dark line of
ripples appeared to the east, gaining rapidly on us—my breathless
remark to Adrian, was followed by the flapping of the canvas, as the
adverse wind struck it, and our boat lurched—swift as speech, the web
of the storm thickened over head, the sun went down red, the dark sea
was strewed with foam, and our skiff rose and fell in its encreasing
furrows.

Behold us now in our frail tenement, hemmed in by hungry, roaring
waves, buffeted by winds. In the inky east two vast clouds, sailing
contrary ways, met; the lightning leapt forth, and the hoarse thunder
muttered. Again in the south, the clouds replied, and the forked stream
of fire running along the black sky, shewed us the appalling piles of
clouds, now met and obliterated by the heaving waves. Great God! And we
alone—we three— alone—alone—sole dwellers on the sea and on the earth,
we three must perish! The vast universe, its myriad worlds, and the
plains of boundless earth which we had left—the extent of shoreless sea
around—contracted to my view—they and all that they contained, shrunk
up to one point, even to our tossing bark, freighted with glorious
humanity.

A convulsion of despair crossed the love-beaming face of Adrian, while
with set teeth he murmured, “Yet they shall be saved!” Clara, visited
by an human pang, pale and trembling, crept near him—he looked on her
with an encouraging smile—“Do you fear, sweet girl? O, do not fear, we
shall soon be on shore!”

The darkness prevented me from seeing the changes of her countenance;
but her voice was clear and sweet, as she replied, “Why should I fear?
neither sea nor storm can harm us, if mighty destiny or the ruler of
destiny does not permit. And then the stinging fear of surviving either
of you, is not here—one death will clasp us undivided.”

Meanwhile we took in all our sails, save a gib; and, as soon as we
might without danger, changed our course, running with the wind for the
Italian shore. Dark night mixed everything; we hardly discerned the
white crests of the murderous surges, except when lightning made brief
noon, and drank the darkness, shewing us our danger, and restoring us
to double night. We were all silent, except when Adrian, as steersman,
made an encouraging observation. Our little shell obeyed the rudder
miraculously well, and ran along on the top of the waves, as if she had
been an offspring of the sea, and the angry mother sheltered her
endangered child.

I sat at the prow, watching our course; when suddenly I heard the
waters break with redoubled fury. We were certainly near the shore—at
the same time I cried, “About there!” and a broad lightning filling the
concave, shewed us for one moment the level beach a-head, disclosing
even the sands, and stunted, ooze-sprinkled beds of reeds, that grew at
high water mark. Again it was dark, and we drew in our breath with such
content as one may, who, while fragments of volcano-hurled rock darken
the air, sees a vast mass ploughing the ground immediately at his feet.
What to do we knew not —the breakers here, there, everywhere,
encompassed us—they roared, and dashed, and flung their hated spray in
our faces. With considerable difficulty and danger we succeeded at
length in altering our course, and stretched out from shore. I urged my
companions to prepare for the wreck of our little skiff, and to bind
themselves to some oar or spar which might suffice to float them. I was
myself an excellent swimmer—the very sight of the sea was wont to raise
in me such sensations, as a huntsman experiences, when he hears a pack
of hounds in full cry; I loved to feel the waves wrap me and strive to
overpower me; while I, lord of myself, moved this way or that, in spite
of their angry buffetings. Adrian also could swim—but the weakness of
his frame prevented him from feeling pleasure in the exercise, or
acquiring any great expertness. But what power could the strongest
swimmer oppose to the overpowering violence of ocean in its fury? My
efforts to prepare my companions were rendered nearly futile —for the
roaring breakers prevented our hearing one another speak, and the
waves, that broke continually over our boat, obliged me to exert all my
strength in lading the water out, as fast as it came in. The while
darkness, palpable and rayless, hemmed us round, dissipated only by the
lightning; sometimes we beheld thunderbolts, fiery red, fall into the
sea, and at intervals vast spouts stooped from the clouds, churning the
wild ocean, which rose to meet them; while the fierce gale bore the
rack onwards, and they were lost in the chaotic mingling of sky and
sea. Our gunwales had been torn away, our single sail had been rent to
ribbands, and borne down the stream of the wind. We had cut away our
mast, and lightened the boat of all she contained—Clara attempted to
assist me in heaving the water from the hold, and, as she turned her
eyes to look on the lightning, I could discern by that momentary gleam,
that resignation had conquered every fear. We have a power given us in
any worst extremity, which props the else feeble mind of man, and
enables us to endure the most savage tortures with a stillness of soul
which in hours of happiness we could not have imagined. A calm, more
dreadful in truth than the tempest, allayed the wild beatings of my
heart—a calm like that of the gamester, the suicide, and the murderer,
when the last die is on the point of being cast—while the poisoned cup
is at the lips,—as the death-blow is about to be given.

Hours passed thus—hours which might write old age on the face of
beardless youth, and grizzle the silky hair of infancy—-hours, while
the chaotic uproar continued, while each dread gust transcended in fury
the one before, and our skiff hung on the breaking wave, and then
rushed into the valley below, and trembled and spun between the watery
precipices that seemed most to meet above her. For a moment the gale
paused, and ocean sank to comparative silence—it was a breathless
interval; the wind which, as a practised leaper, had gathered itself up
before it sprung, now with terrific roar rushed over the sea, and the
waves struck our stern. Adrian exclaimed that the rudder was gone;—“We
are lost,” cried Clara, “Save yourselves—O save yourselves!” The
lightning shewed me the poor girl half buried in the water at the
bottom of the boat; as she was sinking in it Adrian caught her up, and
sustained her in his arms. We were without a rudder—we rushed prow
foremost into the vast billows piled up a-head— they broke over and
filled the tiny skiff; one scream I heard—one cry that we were gone, I
uttered; I found myself in the waters; darkness was around. When the
light of the tempest flashed, I saw the keel of our upset boat close to
me—I clung to this, grasping it with clenched hand and nails, while I
endeavoured during each flash to discover any appearance of my
companions. I thought I saw Adrian at no great distance from me,
clinging to an oar; I sprung from my hold, and with energy beyond my
human strength, I dashed aside the waters as I strove to lay hold of
him. As that hope failed, instinctive love of life animated me, and
feelings of contention, as if a hostile will combated with mine. I
breasted the surges, and flung them from me, as I would the opposing
front and sharpened claws of a lion about to enfang my bosom. When I
had been beaten down by one wave, I rose on another, while I felt
bitter pride curl my lip.

Ever since the storm had carried us near the shore, we had never
attained any great distance from it. With every flash I saw the
bordering coast; yet the progress I made was small, while each wave, as
it receded, carried me back into ocean’s far abysses. At one moment I
felt my foot touch the sand, and then again I was in deep water; my
arms began to lose their power of motion; my breath failed me under the
influence of the strangling waters— a thousand wild and delirious
thoughts crossed me: as well as I can now recall them, my chief feeling
was, how sweet it would be to lay my head on the quiet earth, where the
surges would no longer strike my weakened frame, nor the sound of
waters ring in my ears—to attain this repose, not to save my life, I
made a last effort—the shelving shore suddenly presented a footing for
me. I rose, and was again thrown down by the breakers—a point of rock
to which I was enabled to cling, gave me a moment’s respite; and then,
taking advantage of the ebbing of the waves, I ran forwards— gained the
dry sands, and fell senseless on the oozy reeds that sprinkled them.

I must have lain long deprived of life; for when first, with a
sickening feeling, I unclosed my eyes, the light of morning met them.
Great change had taken place meanwhile: grey dawn dappled the flying
clouds, which sped onwards, leaving visible at intervals vast lakes of
pure ether. A fountain of light arose in an encreasing stream from the
east, behind the waves of the Adriatic, changing the grey to a roseate
hue, and then flooding sky and sea with aerial gold.

A kind of stupor followed my fainting; my senses were alive, but memory
was extinct. The blessed respite was short—a snake lurked near me to
sting me into life—on the first retrospective emotion I would have
started up, but my limbs refused to obey me; my knees trembled, the
muscles had lost all power. I still believed that I might find one of
my beloved companions cast like me, half alive, on the beach; and I
strove in every way to restore my frame to the use of its animal
functions. I wrung the brine from my hair; and the rays of the risen
sun soon visited me with genial warmth. With the restoration of my
bodily powers, my mind became in some degree aware of the universe of
misery, henceforth to be its dwelling. I ran to the water’s edge,
calling on the beloved names. Ocean drank in, and absorbed my feeble
voice, replying with pitiless roar. I climbed a near tree: the level
sands bounded by a pine forest, and the sea clipped round by the
horizon, was all that I could discern. In vain I extended my researches
along the beach; the mast we had thrown overboard, with tangled
cordage, and remnants of a sail, was the sole relic land received of
our wreck. Sometimes I stood still, and wrung my hands. I accused earth
and sky —the universal machine and the Almighty power that misdirected
it. Again I threw myself on the sands, and then the sighing wind,
mimicking a human cry, roused me to bitter, fallacious hope. Assuredly
if any little bark or smallest canoe had been near, I should have
sought the savage plains of ocean, found the dear remains of my lost
ones, and clinging round them, have shared their grave.

The day passed thus; each moment contained eternity; although when hour
after hour had gone by, I wondered at the quick flight of time. Yet
even now I had not drunk the bitter potion to the dregs; I was not yet
persuaded of my loss; I did not yet feel in every pulsation, in every
nerve, in every thought, that I remained alone of my race,—that I was
the LAST MAN.

The day had clouded over, and a drizzling rain set in at sunset. Even
the eternal skies weep, I thought; is there any shame then, that mortal
man should spend himself in tears? I remembered the ancient fables, in
which human beings are described as dissolving away through weeping
into ever-gushing fountains. Ah! that so it were; and then my destiny
would be in some sort akin to the watery death of Adrian and Clara. Oh!
grief is fantastic; it weaves a web on which to trace the history of
its woe from every form and change around; it incorporates itself with
all living nature; it finds sustenance in every object; as light, it
fills all things, and, like light, it gives its own colours to all.

I had wandered in my search to some distance from the spot on which I
had been cast, and came to one of those watch-towers, which at stated
distances line the Italian shore. I was glad of shelter, glad to find a
work of human hands, after I had gazed so long on nature’s drear
barrenness; so I entered, and ascended the rough winding staircase into
the guard-room. So far was fate kind, that no harrowing vestige
remained of its former inhabitants; a few planks laid across two iron
tressels, and strewed with the dried leaves of Indian corn, was the bed
presented to me; and an open chest, containing some half mouldered
biscuit, awakened an appetite, which perhaps existed before, but of
which, until now, I was not aware. Thirst also, violent and parching,
the result of the sea-water I had drank, and of the exhaustion of my
frame, tormented me. Kind nature had gifted the supply of these wants
with pleasurable sensations, so that I—even I!—was refreshed and
calmed, as I ate of this sorry fare, and drank a little of the sour
wine which half filled a flask left in this abandoned dwelling. Then I
stretched myself on the bed, not to be disdained by the victim of
shipwreck. The earthy smell of the dried leaves was balm to my sense
after the hateful odour of sea-weed. I forgot my state of loneliness. I
neither looked backward nor forward; my senses were hushed to repose; I
fell asleep and dreamed of all dear inland scenes, of hay-makers, of
the shepherd’s whistle to his dog, when he demanded his help to drive
the flock to fold; of sights and sounds peculiar to my boyhood’s
mountain life, which I had long forgotten.

I awoke in a painful agony—for I fancied that ocean, breaking its
bounds, carried away the fixed continent and deep rooted mountains,
together with the streams I loved, the woods, and the flocks—it raged
around, with that continued and dreadful roar which had accompanied the
last wreck of surviving humanity. As my waking sense returned, the bare
walls of the guard room closed round me, and the rain pattered against
the single window. How dreadful it is, to emerge from the oblivion of
slumber, and to receive as a good morrow the mute wailing of one’s own
hapless heart —to return from the land of deceptive dreams, to the
heavy knowledge of unchanged disaster!—Thus was it with me, now, and
for ever! The sting of other griefs might be blunted by time; and even
mine yielded sometimes during the day, to the pleasure inspired by the
imagination or the senses; but I never look first upon the
morning-light but with my fingers pressed tight on my bursting heart,
and my soul deluged with the interminable flood of hopeless misery. Now
I awoke for the first time in the dead world—I awoke alone—and the dull
dirge of the sea, heard even amidst the rain, recalled me to the
reflection of the wretch I had become. The sound came like a reproach,
a scoff—like the sting of remorse in the soul—I gasped—the veins and
muscles of my throat swelled, suffocating me. I put my fingers to my
ears, I buried my head in the leaves of my couch, I would have dived to
the centre to lose hearing of that hideous moan.

But another task must be mine—again I visited the detested beach— again
I vainly looked far and wide—again I raised my unanswered cry, lifting
up the only voice that could ever again force the mute air to syllable
the human thought.

What a pitiable, forlorn, disconsolate being I was! My very aspect and
garb told the tale of my despair. My hair was matted and wild—my limbs
soiled with salt ooze; while at sea, I had thrown off those of my
garments that encumbered me, and the rain drenched the thin
summer-clothing I had retained—my feet were bare, and the stunted reeds
and broken shells made them bleed—the while, I hurried to and fro, now
looking earnestly on some distant rock which, islanded in the sands,
bore for a moment a deceptive appearance—now with flashing eyes
reproaching the murderous ocean for its unutterable cruelty.

For a moment I compared myself to that monarch of the waste—Robinson
Crusoe. We had been both thrown companionless—he on the shore of a
desolate island: I on that of a desolate world. I was rich in the so
called goods of life. If I turned my steps from the near barren scene,
and entered any of the earth’s million cities, I should find their
wealth stored up for my accommodation—clothes, food, books, and a
choice of dwelling beyond the command of the princes of former
times—every climate was subject to my selection, while he was obliged
to toil in the acquirement of every necessary, and was the inhabitant
of a tropical island, against whose heats and storms he could obtain
small shelter.—Viewing the question thus, who would not have preferred
the Sybarite enjoyments I could command, the philosophic leisure, and
ample intellectual resources, to his life of labour and peril? Yet he
was far happier than I: for he could hope, nor hope in vain—the
destined vessel at last arrived, to bear him to countrymen and kindred,
where the events of his solitude became a fire-side tale. To none could
I ever relate the story of my adversity; no hope had I. He knew that,
beyond the ocean which begirt his lonely island, thousands lived whom
the sun enlightened when it shone also on him: beneath the meridian sun
and visiting moon, I alone bore human features; I alone could give
articulation to thought; and, when I slept, both day and night were
unbeheld of any. He had fled from his fellows, and was transported with
terror at the print of a human foot. I would have knelt down and
worshipped the same. The wild and cruel Caribbee, the merciless
Cannibal—or worse than these, the uncouth, brute, and remorseless
veteran in the vices of civilization, would have been to me a beloved
companion, a treasure dearly prized—his nature would be kin to mine;
his form cast in the same mould; human blood would flow in his veins; a
human sympathy must link us for ever. It cannot be that I shall never
behold a fellow being more!—never! —never!—not in the course of
years!—Shall I wake, and speak to none, pass the interminable hours, my
soul, islanded in the world, a solitary point, surrounded by vacuum?
Will day follow day endlessly thus? —No! no! a God rules the
world—providence has not exchanged its golden sceptre for an aspic’s
sting. Away! let me fly from the ocean-grave, let me depart from this
barren nook, paled in, as it is, from access by its own desolateness;
let me tread once again the paved towns; step over the threshold of
man’s dwellings, and most certainly I shall find this thought a
horrible vision—a maddening, but evanescent dream.

I entered Ravenna, (the town nearest to the spot whereon I had been
cast), before the second sun had set on the empty world; I saw many
living creatures; oxen, and horses, and dogs, but there was no man
among them; I entered a cottage, it was vacant; I ascended the marble
stairs of a palace, the bats and the owls were nestled in the tapestry;
I stepped softly, not to awaken the sleeping town: I rebuked a dog,
that by yelping disturbed the sacred stillness; I would not believe
that all was as it seemed—The world was not dead, but I was mad; I was
deprived of sight, hearing, and sense of touch; I was labouring under
the force of a spell, which permitted me to behold all sights of earth,
except its human inhabitants; they were pursuing their ordinary
labours. Every house had its inmate; but I could not perceive them. If
I could have deluded myself into a belief of this kind, I should have
been far more satisfied. But my brain, tenacious of its reason, refused
to lend itself to such imaginations—and though I endeavoured to play
the antic to myself, I knew that I, the offspring of man, during long
years one among many—now remained sole survivor of my species.

The sun sank behind the western hills; I had fasted since the preceding
evening, but, though faint and weary, I loathed food, nor ceased, while
yet a ray of light remained, to pace the lonely streets. Night came on,
and sent every living creature but me to the bosom of its mate. It was
my solace, to blunt my mental agony by personal hardship—of the
thousand beds around, I would not seek the luxury of one; I lay down on
the pavement,—a cold marble step served me for a pillow—midnight came;
and then, though not before, did my wearied lids shut out the sight of
the twinkling stars, and their reflex on the pavement near. Thus I
passed the second night of my desolation.




CHAPTER X.


I awoke in the morning, just as the higher windows of the lofty houses
received the first beams of the rising sun. The birds were chirping,
perched on the windows sills and deserted thresholds of the doors. I
awoke, and my first thought was, Adrian and Clara are dead. I no longer
shall be hailed by their good-morrow—or pass the long day in their
society. I shall never see them more. The ocean has robbed me of
them—stolen their hearts of love from their breasts, and given over to
corruption what was dearer to me than light, or life, or hope.

I was an untaught shepherd-boy, when Adrian deigned to confer on me his
friendship. The best years of my life had been passed with him. All I
had possessed of this world’s goods, of happiness, knowledge, or
virtue—I owed to him. He had, in his person, his intellect, and rare
qualities, given a glory to my life, which without him it had never
known. Beyond all other beings he had taught me, that goodness, pure
and single, can be an attribute of man. It was a sight for angels to
congregate to behold, to view him lead, govern, and solace, the last
days of the human race.

My lovely Clara also was lost to me—she who last of the daughters of
man, exhibited all those feminine and maiden virtues, which poets,
painters, and sculptors, have in their various languages strove to
express. Yet, as far as she was concerned, could I lament that she was
removed in early youth from the certain advent of misery? Pure she was
of soul, and all her intents were holy. But her heart was the throne of
love, and the sensibility her lovely countenance expressed, was the
prophet of many woes, not the less deep and drear, because she would
have for ever concealed them.

These two wondrously endowed beings had been spared from the universal
wreck, to be my companions during the last year of solitude. I had
felt, while they were with me, all their worth. I was conscious that
every other sentiment, regret, or passion had by degrees merged into a
yearning, clinging affection for them. I had not forgotten the sweet
partner of my youth, mother of my children, my adored Idris; but I saw
at least a part of her spirit alive again in her brother; and after,
that by Evelyn’s death I had lost what most dearly recalled her to me;
I enshrined her memory in Adrian’s form, and endeavoured to confound
the two dear ideas. I sound the depths of my heart, and try in vain to
draw thence the expressions that can typify my love for these remnants
of my race. If regret and sorrow came athwart me, as well it might in
our solitary and uncertain state, the clear tones of Adrian’s voice,
and his fervent look, dissipated the gloom; or I was cheered unaware by
the mild content and sweet resignation Clara’s cloudless brow and deep
blue eyes expressed. They were all to me—the suns of my benighted
soul—repose in my weariness—slumber in my sleepless woe. Ill, most ill,
with disjointed words, bare and weak, have I expressed the feeling with
which I clung to them. I would have wound myself like ivy inextricably
round them, so that the same blow might destroy us. I would have
entered and been a part of them—so that

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,


even now I had accompanied them to their new and incommunicable abode.

Never shall I see them more. I am bereft of their dear converse—bereft
of sight of them. I am a tree rent by lightning; never will the bark
close over the bared fibres—never will their quivering life, torn by
the winds, receive the opiate of a moment’s balm. I am alone in the
world— but that expression as yet was less pregnant with misery, than
that Adrian and Clara are dead.

The tide of thought and feeling rolls on for ever the same, though the
banks and shapes around, which govern its course, and the reflection in
the wave, vary. Thus the sentiment of immediate loss in some sort
decayed, while that of utter, irremediable loneliness grew on me with
time. Three days I wandered through Ravenna—now thinking only of the
beloved beings who slept in the oozy caves of ocean—now looking forward
on the dread blank before me; shuddering to make an onward
step—writhing at each change that marked the progress of the hours.

For three days I wandered to and fro in this melancholy town. I passed
whole hours in going from house to house, listening whether I could
detect some lurking sign of human existence. Sometimes I rang at a
bell; it tinkled through the vaulted rooms, and silence succeeded to
the sound. I called myself hopeless, yet still I hoped; and still
disappointment ushered in the hours, intruding the cold, sharp steel
which first pierced me, into the aching festering wound. I fed like a
wild beast, which seizes its food only when stung by intolerable
hunger. I did not change my garb, or seek the shelter of a roof, during
all those days. Burning heats, nervous irritation, a ceaseless, but
confused flow of thought, sleepless nights, and days instinct with a
frenzy of agitation, possessed me during that time.

As the fever of my blood encreased, a desire of wandering came upon me.
I remember, that the sun had set on the fifth day after my wreck, when,
without purpose or aim, I quitted the town of Ravenna. I must have been
very ill. Had I been possessed by more or less of delirium, that night
had surely been my last; for, as I continued to walk on the banks of
the Mantone, whose upward course I followed, I looked wistfully on the
stream, acknowledging to myself that its pellucid waves could medicine
my woes for ever, and was unable to account to myself for my tardiness
in seeking their shelter from the poisoned arrows of thought, that were
piercing me through and through. I walked a considerable part of the
night, and excessive weariness at length conquered my repugnance to the
availing myself of the deserted habitations of my species. The waning
moon, which had just risen, shewed me a cottage, whose neat entrance
and trim garden reminded me of my own England. I lifted up the latch of
the door and entered. A kitchen first presented itself, where, guided
by the moon beams, I found materials for striking a light. Within this
was a bed room; the couch was furnished with sheets of snowy whiteness;
the wood piled on the hearth, and an array as for a meal, might almost
have deceived me into the dear belief that I had here found what I had
so long sought—one survivor, a companion for my loneliness, a solace to
my despair. I steeled myself against the delusion; the room itself was
vacant: it was only prudent, I repeated to myself, to examine the rest
of the house. I fancied that I was proof against the expectation; yet
my heart beat audibly, as I laid my hand on the lock of each door, and
it sunk again, when I perceived in each the same vacancy. Dark and
silent they were as vaults; so I returned to the first chamber,
wondering what sightless host had spread the materials for my repast,
and my repose. I drew a chair to the table, and examined what the
viands were of which I was to partake. In truth it was a death feast!
The bread was blue and mouldy; the cheese lay a heap of dust. I did not
dare examine the other dishes; a troop of ants passed in a double line
across the table cloth; every utensil was covered with dust, with
cobwebs, and myriads of dead flies: these were objects each and all
betokening the fallaciousness of my expectations. Tears rushed into my
eyes; surely this was a wanton display of the power of the destroyer.
What had I done, that each sensitive nerve was thus to be anatomized?
Yet why complain more now than ever? This vacant cottage revealed no
new sorrow— the world was empty; mankind was dead—I knew it well—why
quarrel therefore with an acknowledged and stale truth? Yet, as I said,
I had hoped in the very heart of despair, so that every new impression
of the hard-cut reality on my soul brought with it a fresh pang,
telling me the yet unstudied lesson, that neither change of place nor
time could bring alleviation to my misery, but that, as I now was, I
must continue, day after day, month after month, year after year, while
I lived. I hardly dared conjecture what space of time that expression
implied. It is true, I was no longer in the first blush of manhood;
neither had I declined far in the vale of years—men have accounted mine
the prime of life: I had just entered my thirty-seventh year; every
limb was as well knit, every articulation as true, as when I had acted
the shepherd on the hills of Cumberland; and with these advantages I
was to commence the train of solitary life. Such were the reflections
that ushered in my slumber on that night.

The shelter, however, and less disturbed repose which I enjoyed,
restored me the following morning to a greater portion of health and
strength, than I had experienced since my fatal shipwreck. Among the
stores I had discovered on searching the cottage the preceding night,
was a quantity of dried grapes; these refreshed me in the morning, as I
left my lodging and proceeded towards a town which I discerned at no
great distance. As far as I could divine, it must have been Forli. I
entered with pleasure its wide and grassy streets. All, it is true,
pictured the excess of desolation; yet I loved to find myself in those
spots which had been the abode of my fellow creatures. I delighted to
traverse street after street, to look up at the tall houses, and repeat
to myself, once they contained beings similar to myself—I was not
always the wretch I am now. The wide square of Forli, the arcade around
it, its light and pleasant aspect cheered me. I was pleased with the
idea, that, if the earth should be again peopled, we, the lost race,
would, in the relics left behind, present no contemptible exhibition of
our powers to the new comers.

I entered one of the palaces, and opened the door of a magnificent
saloon. I started—I looked again with renewed wonder. What
wild-looking, unkempt, half-naked savage was that before me? The
surprise was momentary.

I perceived that it was I myself whom I beheld in a large mirror at the
end of the hall. No wonder that the lover of the princely Idris should
fail to recognize himself in the miserable object there pourtrayed. My
tattered dress was that in which I had crawled half alive from the
tempestuous sea. My long and tangled hair hung in elf locks on my
brow—my dark eyes, now hollow and wild, gleamed from under them—my
cheeks were discoloured by the jaundice, which (the effect of misery
and neglect) suffused my skin, and were half hid by a beard of many
days’ growth.

Yet why should I not remain thus, I thought; the world is dead, and
this squalid attire is a fitter mourning garb than the foppery of a
black suit. And thus, methinks, I should have remained, had not hope,
without which I do not believe man could exist, whispered to me, that,
in such a plight, I should be an object of fear and aversion to the
being, preserved I knew not where, but I fondly trusted, at length, to
be found by me. Will my readers scorn the vanity, that made me attire
myself with some care, for the sake of this visionary being? Or will
they forgive the freaks of a half crazed imagination? I can easily
forgive myself—for hope, however vague, was so dear to me, and a
sentiment of pleasure of so rare occurrence, that I yielded readily to
any idea, that cherished the one, or promised any recurrence of the
former to my sorrowing heart. After such occupation, I visited every
street, alley, and nook of Forli. These Italian towns presented an
appearance of still greater desolation, than those of England or
France. Plague had appeared here earlier—it had finished its course,
and achieved its work much sooner than with us. Probably the last
summer had found no human being alive, in all the track included
between the shores of Calabria and the northern Alps. My search was
utterly vain, yet I did not despond. Reason methought was on my side;
and the chances were by no means contemptible, that there should exist
in some part of Italy a survivor like myself—of a wasted, depopulate
land. As therefore I rambled through the empty town, I formed my plan
for future operations. I would continue to journey on towards Rome.
After I should have satisfied myself, by a narrow search, that I left
behind no human being in the towns through which I passed, I would
write up in a conspicuous part of each, with white paint, in three
languages, that “Verney, the last of the race of Englishmen, had taken
up his abode in Rome.”

In pursuance of this scheme, I entered a painter’s shop, and procured
myself the paint. It is strange that so trivial an occupation should
have consoled, and even enlivened me. But grief renders one childish,
despair fantastic. To this simple inscription, I merely added the
adjuration, “Friend, come! I wait for thee!—_Deh, vieni! ti aspetto!_”
On the following morning, with something like hope for my companion, I
quitted Forli on my way to Rome. Until now, agonizing retrospect, and
dreary prospects for the future, had stung me when awake, and cradled
me to my repose. Many times I had delivered myself up to the tyranny of
anguish— many times I resolved a speedy end to my woes; and death by my
own hands was a remedy, whose practicability was even cheering to me.
What could I fear in the other world? If there were an hell, and I were
doomed to it, I should come an adept to the sufferance of its
tortures—the act were easy, the speedy and certain end of my deplorable
tragedy. But now these thoughts faded before the new born expectation.
I went on my way, not as before, feeling each hour, each minute, to be
an age instinct with incalculable pain.

As I wandered along the plain, at the foot of the Appennines—through
their vallies, and over their bleak summits, my path led me through a
country which had been trodden by heroes, visited and admired by
thousands. They had, as a tide, receded, leaving me blank and bare in
the midst. But why complain? Did I not hope?—so I schooled myself, even
after the enlivening spirit had really deserted me, and thus I was
obliged to call up all the fortitude I could command, and that was not
much, to prevent a recurrence of that chaotic and intolerable despair,
that had succeeded to the miserable shipwreck, that had consummated
every fear, and dashed to annihilation every joy.

I rose each day with the morning sun, and left my desolate inn. As my
feet strayed through the unpeopled country, my thoughts rambled through
the universe, and I was least miserable when I could, absorbed in
reverie, forget the passage of the hours. Each evening, in spite of
weariness, I detested to enter any dwelling, there to take up my
nightly abode—I have sat, hour after hour, at the door of the cottage I
had selected, unable to lift the latch, and meet face to face blank
desertion within. Many nights, though autumnal mists were spread
around, I passed under an ilex—many times I have supped on arbutus
berries and chestnuts, making a fire, gypsy-like, on the ground—because
wild natural scenery reminded me less acutely of my hopeless state of
loneliness. I counted the days, and bore with me a peeled willow-wand,
on which, as well as I could remember, I had notched the days that had
elapsed since my wreck, and each night I added another unit to the
melancholy sum.

I had toiled up a hill which led to Spoleto. Around was spread a plain,
encircled by the chestnut-covered Appennines. A dark ravine was on one
side, spanned by an aqueduct, whose tall arches were rooted in the dell
below, and attested that man had once deigned to bestow labour and
thought here, to adorn and civilize nature. Savage, ungrateful nature,
which in wild sport defaced his remains, protruding her easily renewed,
and fragile growth of wild flowers and parasite plants around his
eternal edifices. I sat on a fragment of rock, and looked round. The
sun had bathed in gold the western atmosphere, and in the east the
clouds caught the radiance, and budded into transient loveliness. It
set on a world that contained me alone for its inhabitant. I took out
my wand—I counted the marks. Twenty-five were already
traced—twenty-five days had already elapsed, since human voice had
gladdened my ears, or human countenance met my gaze. Twenty-five long,
weary days, succeeded by dark and lonesome nights, had mingled with
foregone years, and had become a part of the past—the never to be
recalled—a real, undeniable portion of my life—twenty-five long, long
days.

Why this was not a month!—Why talk of days—or weeks—or months—I must
grasp years in my imagination, if I would truly picture the future to
myself—three, five, ten, twenty, fifty anniversaries of that fatal
epoch might elapse—every year containing twelve months, each of more
numerous calculation in a diary, than the twenty-five days gone by—Can
it be? Will it be?—We had been used to look forward to death
tremulously— wherefore, but because its place was obscure? But more
terrible, and far more obscure, was the unveiled course of my lone
futurity. I broke my wand; I threw it from me. I needed no recorder of
the inch and barley-corn growth of my life, while my unquiet thoughts
created other divisions, than those ruled over by the planets—and, in
looking back on the age that had elapsed since I had been alone, I
disdained to give the name of days and hours to the throes of agony
which had in truth portioned it out.

I hid my face in my hands. The twitter of the young birds going to
rest, and their rustling among the trees, disturbed the still
evening-air—the crickets chirped—the aziolo cooed at intervals. My
thoughts had been of death—these sounds spoke to me of life. I lifted
up my eyes—a bat wheeled round—the sun had sunk behind the jagged line
of mountains, and the paly, crescent moon was visible, silver white,
amidst the orange sunset, and accompanied by one bright star, prolonged
thus the twilight. A herd of cattle passed along in the dell below,
untended, towards their watering place—the grass was rustled by a
gentle breeze, and the olive-woods, mellowed into soft masses by the
moonlight, contrasted their sea-green with the dark chestnut foliage.
Yes, this is the earth; there is no change—no ruin—no rent made in her
verdurous expanse; she continues to wheel round and round, with
alternate night and day, through the sky, though man is not her adorner
or inhabitant. Why could I not forget myself like one of those animals,
and no longer suffer the wild tumult of misery that I endure? Yet, ah!
what a deadly breach yawns between their state and mine! Have not they
companions? Have not they each their mate—their cherished young, their
home, which, though unexpressed to us, is, I doubt not, endeared and
enriched, even in their eyes, by the society which kind nature has
created for them? It is I only that am alone—I, on this little hill
top, gazing on plain and mountain recess—on sky, and its starry
population, listening to every sound of earth, and air, and murmuring
wave,—I only cannot express to any companion my many thoughts, nor lay
my throbbing head on any loved bosom, nor drink from meeting eyes an
intoxicating dew, that transcends the fabulous nectar of the gods.
Shall I not then complain? Shall I not curse the murderous engine which
has mowed down the children of men, my brethren? Shall I not bestow a
malediction on every other of nature’s offspring, which dares live and
enjoy, while I live and suffer?

Ah, no! I will discipline my sorrowing heart to sympathy in your joys;
I will be happy, because ye are so. Live on, ye innocents, nature’s
selected darlings; I am not much unlike to you. Nerves, pulse, brain,
joint, and flesh, of such am I composed, and ye are organized by the
same laws. I have something beyond this, but I will call it a defect,
not an endowment, if it leads me to misery, while ye are happy. Just
then, there emerged from a near copse two goats and a little kid, by
the mother’s side; they began to browze the herbage of the hill. I
approached near to them, without their perceiving me; I gathered a
handful of fresh grass, and held it out; the little one nestled close
to its mother, while she timidly withdrew. The male stepped forward,
fixing his eyes on me: I drew near, still holding out my lure, while
he, depressing his head, rushed at me with his horns. I was a very
fool; I knew it, yet I yielded to my rage. I snatched up a huge
fragment of rock; it would have crushed my rash foe. I poized it—aimed
it—then my heart failed me. I hurled it wide of the mark; it rolled
clattering among the bushes into dell. My little visitants, all aghast,
galloped back into the covert of the wood; while I, my very heart
bleeding and torn, rushed down the hill, and by the violence of bodily
exertion, sought to escape from my miserable self.

No, no, I will not live among the wild scenes of nature, the enemy of
all that lives. I will seek the towns—Rome, the capital of the world,
the crown of man’s achievements. Among its storied streets, hallowed
ruins, and stupendous remains of human exertion, I shall not, as here,
find every thing forgetful of man; trampling on his memory, defacing
his works, proclaiming from hill to hill, and vale to vale,—by the
torrents freed from the boundaries which he imposed—by the vegetation
liberated from the laws which he enforced—by his habitation abandoned
to mildew and weeds, that his power is lost, his race annihilated for
ever.

I hailed the Tiber, for that was as it were an unalienable possession
of humanity. I hailed the wild Campagna, for every rood had been trod
by man; and its savage uncultivation, of no recent date, only
proclaimed more distinctly his power, since he had given an honourable
name and sacred title to what else would have been a worthless, barren
track. I entered Eternal Rome by the Porta del Popolo, and saluted with
awe its time-honoured space. The wide square, the churches near, the
long extent of the Corso, the near eminence of Trinita de’ Monti
appeared like fairy work, they were so silent, so peaceful, and so very
fair. It was evening; and the population of animals which still existed
in this mighty city, had gone to rest; there was no sound, save the
murmur of its many fountains, whose soft monotony was harmony to my
soul. The knowledge that I was in Rome, soothed me; that wondrous city,
hardly more illustrious for its heroes and sages, than for the power it
exercised over the imaginations of men. I went to rest that night; the
eternal burning of my heart quenched,—my senses tranquil.

The next morning I eagerly began my rambles in search of oblivion. I
ascended the many terraces of the garden of the Colonna Palace, under
whose roof I had been sleeping; and passing out from it at its summit,
I found myself on Monte Cavallo. The fountain sparkled in the sun; the
obelisk above pierced the clear dark-blue air. The statues on each
side, the works, as they are inscribed, of Phidias and Praxiteles,
stood in undiminished grandeur, representing Castor and Pollux, who
with majestic power tamed the rearing animal at their side. If those
illustrious artists had in truth chiselled these forms, how many
passing generations had their giant proportions outlived! and now they
were viewed by the last of the species they were sculptured to
represent and deify. I had shrunk into insignificance in my own eyes,
as I considered the multitudinous beings these stone demigods had
outlived, but this after-thought restored me to dignity in my own
conception. The sight of the poetry eternized in these statues, took
the sting from the thought, arraying it only in poetic ideality.

I repeated to myself,—I am in Rome! I behold, and as it were,
familiarly converse with the wonder of the world, sovereign mistress of
the imagination, majestic and eternal survivor of millions of
generations of extinct men. I endeavoured to quiet the sorrows of my
aching heart, by even now taking an interest in what in my youth I had
ardently longed to see. Every part of Rome is replete with relics of
ancient times. The meanest streets are strewed with truncated columns,
broken capitals—Corinthian and Ionic, and sparkling fragments of
granite or porphyry. The walls of the most penurious dwellings enclose
a fluted pillar or ponderous stone, which once made part of the palace
of the Cæsars; and the voice of dead time, in still vibrations, is
breathed from these dumb things, animated and glorified as they were by
man.

I embraced the vast columns of the temple of Jupiter Stator, which
survives in the open space that was the Forum, and leaning my burning
cheek against its cold durability, I tried to lose the sense of present
misery and present desertion, by recalling to the haunted cell of my
brain vivid memories of times gone by. I rejoiced at my success, as I
figured Camillus, the Gracchi, Cato, and last the heroes of Tacitus,
which shine meteors of surpassing brightness during the murky night of
the empire;—as the verses of Horace and Virgil, or the glowing periods
of Cicero thronged into the opened gates of my mind, I felt myself
exalted by long forgotten enthusiasm. I was delighted to know that I
beheld the scene which they beheld—the scene which their wives and
mothers, and crowds of the unnamed witnessed, while at the same time
they honoured, applauded, or wept for these matchless specimens of
humanity. At length, then, I had found a consolation. I had not vainly
sought the storied precincts of Rome—I had discovered a medicine for my
many and vital wounds.

I sat at the foot of these vast columns. The Coliseum, whose naked ruin
is robed by nature in a verdurous and glowing veil, lay in the sunlight
on my right. Not far off, to the left, was the Tower of the Capitol.
Triumphal arches, the falling walls of many temples, strewed the ground
at my feet. I strove, I resolved, to force myself to see the Plebeian
multitude and lofty Patrician forms congregated around; and, as the
Diorama of ages passed across my subdued fancy, they were replaced by
the modern Roman; the Pope, in his white stole, distributing
benedictions to the kneeling worshippers; the friar in his cowl; the
dark-eyed girl, veiled by her mezzera; the noisy, sun-burnt rustic,
leading his herd of buffaloes and oxen to the Campo Vaccino. The
romance with which, dipping our pencils in the rainbow hues of sky and
transcendent nature, we to a degree gratuitously endow the Italians,
replaced the solemn grandeur of antiquity. I remembered the dark monk,
and floating figures of “The Italian,” and how my boyish blood had
thrilled at the description. I called to mind Corinna ascending the
Capitol to be crowned, and, passing from the heroine to the author,
reflected how the Enchantress Spirit of Rome held sovereign sway over
the minds of the imaginative, until it rested on me—sole remaining
spectator of its wonders.

I was long wrapt by such ideas; but the soul wearies of a pauseless
flight; and, stooping from its wheeling circuits round and round this
spot, suddenly it fell ten thousand fathom deep, into the abyss of the
present— into self-knowledge—into tenfold sadness. I roused myself—I
cast off my waking dreams; and I, who just now could almost hear the
shouts of the Roman throng, and was hustled by countless multitudes,
now beheld the desart ruins of Rome sleeping under its own blue sky;
the shadows lay tranquilly on the ground; sheep were grazing untended
on the Palatine, and a buffalo stalked down the Sacred Way that led to
the Capitol. I was alone in the Forum; alone in Rome; alone in the
world. Would not one living man —one companion in my weary solitude, be
worth all the glory and remembered power of this time-honoured city?
Double sorrow—sadness, bred in Cimmerian caves, robed my soul in a
mourning garb. The generations I had conjured up to my fancy,
contrasted more strongly with the end of all —the single point in
which, as a pyramid, the mighty fabric of society had ended, while I,
on the giddy height, saw vacant space around me.

From such vague laments I turned to the contemplation of the minutiae
of my situation. So far, I had not succeeded in the sole object of my
desires, the finding a companion for my desolation. Yet I did not
despair. It is true that my inscriptions were set up for the most part,
in insignificant towns and villages; yet, even without these memorials,
it was possible that the person, who like me should find himself alone
in a depopulate land, should, like me, come to Rome. The more slender
my expectation was, the more I chose to build on it, and to accommodate
my actions to this vague possibility.

It became necessary therefore, that for a time I should domesticate
myself at Rome. It became necessary, that I should look my disaster in
the face— not playing the school-boy’s part of obedience without
submission; enduring life, and yet rebelling against the laws by which
I lived.

Yet how could I resign myself? Without love, without sympathy, without
communion with any, how could I meet the morning sun, and with it trace
its oft repeated journey to the evening shades? Why did I continue to
live— why not throw off the weary weight of time, and with my own hand,
let out the fluttering prisoner from my agonized breast?—It was not
cowardice that withheld me; for the true fortitude was to endure; and
death had a soothing sound accompanying it, that would easily entice me
to enter its demesne. But this I would not do. I had, from the moment I
had reasoned on the subject, instituted myself the subject to fate, and
the servant of necessity, the visible laws of the invisible God—I
believed that my obedience was the result of sound reasoning, pure
feeling, and an exalted sense of the true excellence and nobility of my
nature. Could I have seen in this empty earth, in the seasons and their
change, the hand of a blind power only, most willingly would I have
placed my head on the sod, and closed my eyes on its loveliness for
ever. But fate had administered life to me, when the plague had already
seized on its prey—she had dragged me by the hair from out the
strangling waves—By such miracles she had bought me for her own; I
admitted her authority, and bowed to her decrees. If, after mature
consideration, such was my resolve, it was doubly necessary that I
should not lose the end of life, the improvement of my faculties, and
poison its flow by repinings without end. Yet how cease to repine,
since there was no hand near to extract the barbed spear that had
entered my heart of hearts? I stretched out my hand, and it touched
none whose sensations were responsive to mine. I was girded, walled in,
vaulted over, by seven-fold barriers of loneliness. Occupation alone,
if I could deliver myself up to it, would be capable of affording an
opiate to my sleepless sense of woe. Having determined to make Rome my
abode, at least for some months, I made arrangements for my
accommodation—I selected my home. The Colonna Palace was well adapted
for my purpose. Its grandeur— its treasure of paintings, its
magnificent halls were objects soothing and even exhilarating.

I found the granaries of Rome well stored with grain, and particularly
with Indian corn; this product requiring less art in its preparation
for food, I selected as my principal support. I now found the hardships
and lawlessness of my youth turn to account. A man cannot throw off the
habits of sixteen years. Since that age, it is true, I had lived
luxuriously, or at least surrounded by all the conveniences
civilization afforded. But before that time, I had been “as uncouth a
savage, as the wolf-bred founder of old Rome”—and now, in Rome itself,
robber and shepherd propensities, similar to those of its founder, were
of advantage to its sole inhabitant. I spent the morning riding and
shooting in the Campagna—I passed long hours in the various galleries—I
gazed at each statue, and lost myself in a reverie before many a fair
Madonna or beauteous nymph. I haunted the Vatican, and stood surrounded
by marble forms of divine beauty. Each stone deity was possessed by
sacred gladness, and the eternal fruition of love. They looked on me
with unsympathizing complacency, and often in wild accents I reproached
them for their supreme indifference—for they were human shapes, the
human form divine was manifest in each fairest limb and lineament. The
perfect moulding brought with it the idea of colour and motion; often,
half in bitter mockery, half in self-delusion, I clasped their icy
proportions, and, coming between Cupid and his Psyche’s lips, pressed
the unconceiving marble.

I endeavoured to read. I visited the libraries of Rome. I selected a
volume, and, choosing some sequestered, shady nook, on the banks of the
Tiber, or opposite the fair temple in the Borghese Gardens, or under
the old pyramid of Cestius, I endeavoured to conceal me from myself,
and immerse myself in the subject traced on the pages before me. As if
in the same soil you plant nightshade and a myrtle tree, they will each
appropriate the mould, moisture, and air administered, for the
fostering their several properties—so did my grief find sustenance, and
power of existence, and growth, in what else had been divine manna, to
feed radiant meditation. Ah! while I streak this paper with the tale of
what my so named occupations were—while I shape the skeleton of my
days—my hand trembles—my heart pants, and my brain refuses to lend
expression, or phrase, or idea, by which to image forth the veil of
unutterable woe that clothed these bare realities. O, worn and beating
heart, may I dissect thy fibres, and tell how in each unmitigable
misery, sadness dire, repinings, and despair, existed? May I record my
many ravings—the wild curses I hurled at torturing nature—and how I
have passed days shut out from light and food—from all except the
burning hell alive in my own bosom?

I was presented, meantime, with one other occupation, the one best
fitted to discipline my melancholy thoughts, which strayed backwards,
over many a ruin, and through many a flowery glade, even to the
mountain recess, from which in early youth I had first emerged.

During one of my rambles through the habitations of Rome, I found
writing materials on a table in an author’s study. Parts of a
manuscript lay scattered about. It contained a learned disquisition on
the Italian language; one page an unfinished dedication to posterity,
for whose profit the writer had sifted and selected the niceties of
this harmonious language —to whose everlasting benefit he bequeathed
his labours.

I also will write a book, I cried—for whom to read?—to whom dedicated?
And then with silly flourish (what so capricious and childish as
despair?) I wrote,

DEDICATION
TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD.
SHADOWS, ARISE, AND READ YOUR FALL!
BEHOLD THE HISTORY OF THE
LAST MAN.


Yet, will not this world be re-peopled, and the children of a saved
pair of lovers, in some to me unknown and unattainable seclusion,
wandering to these prodigious relics of the ante-pestilential race,
seek to learn how beings so wondrous in their achievements, with
imaginations infinite, and powers godlike, had departed from their home
to an unknown country?

I will write and leave in this most ancient city, this “world’s sole
monument,” a record of these things. I will leave a monument of the
existence of Verney, the Last Man. At first I thought only to speak of
plague, of death, and last, of desertion; but I lingered fondly on my
early years, and recorded with sacred zeal the virtues of my
companions. They have been with me during the fulfilment of my task. I
have brought it to an end—I lift my eyes from my paper—again they are
lost to me. Again I feel that I am alone.

A year has passed since I have been thus occupied. The seasons have
made their wonted round, and decked this eternal city in a changeful
robe of surpassing beauty. A year has passed; and I no longer _guess_
at my state or my prospects—loneliness is my familiar, sorrow my
inseparable companion. I have endeavoured to brave the storm—I have
endeavoured to school myself to fortitude—I have sought to imbue myself
with the lessons of wisdom. It will not do. My hair has become nearly
grey—my voice, unused now to utter sound, comes strangely on my ears.
My person, with its human powers and features, seem to me a monstrous
excrescence of nature. How express in human language a woe human being
until this hour never knew! How give intelligible expression to a pang
none but I could ever understand!— No one has entered Rome. None will
ever come. I smile bitterly at the delusion I have so long nourished,
and still more, when I reflect that I have exchanged it for another as
delusive, as false, but to which I now cling with the same fond trust.

Winter has come again; and the gardens of Rome have lost their leaves—
the sharp air comes over the Campagna, and has driven its brute
inhabitants to take up their abode in the many dwellings of the
deserted city—frost has suspended the gushing fountains—and Trevi has
stilled her eternal music. I had made a rough calculation, aided by the
stars, by which I endeavoured to ascertain the first day of the new
year. In the old out-worn age, the Sovereign Pontiff was used to go in
solemn pomp, and mark the renewal of the year by driving a nail in the
gate of the temple of Janus. On that day I ascended St. Peter’s, and
carved on its topmost stone the aera 2100, last year of the world!

My only companion was a dog, a shaggy fellow, half water and half
shepherd’s dog, whom I found tending sheep in the Campagna. His master
was dead, but nevertheless he continued fulfilling his duties in
expectation of his return. If a sheep strayed from the rest, he forced
it to return to the flock, and sedulously kept off every intruder.
Riding in the Campagna I had come upon his sheep-walk, and for some
time observed his repetition of lessons learned from man, now useless,
though unforgotten. His delight was excessive when he saw me. He sprung
up to my knees; he capered round and round, wagging his tail, with the
short, quick bark of pleasure: he left his fold to follow me, and from
that day has never neglected to watch by and attend on me, shewing
boisterous gratitude whenever I caressed or talked to him. His
pattering steps and mine alone were heard, when we entered the
magnificent extent of nave and aisle of St. Peter’s. We ascended the
myriad steps together, when on the summit I achieved my design, and in
rough figures noted the date of the last year. I then turned to gaze on
the country, and to take leave of Rome. I had long determined to quit
it, and I now formed the plan I would adopt for my future career, after
I had left this magnificent abode.

A solitary being is by instinct a wanderer, and that I would become. A
hope of amelioration always attends on change of place, which would
even lighten the burthen of my life. I had been a fool to remain in
Rome all this time: Rome noted for Malaria, the famous caterer for
death. But it was still possible, that, could I visit the whole extent
of earth, I should find in some part of the wide extent a survivor.
Methought the sea-side was the most probable retreat to be chosen by
such a one. If left alone in an inland district, still they could not
continue in the spot where their last hopes had been extinguished; they
would journey on, like me, in search of a partner for their solitude,
till the watery barrier stopped their further progress.

To that water—cause of my woes, perhaps now to be their cure, I would
betake myself. Farewell, Italy!—farewell, thou ornament of the world,
matchless Rome, the retreat of the solitary one during long months!—to
civilized life—to the settled home and succession of monotonous days,
farewell! Peril will now be mine; and I hail her as a friend—death will
perpetually cross my path, and I will meet him as a benefactor;
hardship, inclement weather, and dangerous tempests will be my sworn
mates. Ye spirits of storm, receive me! ye powers of destruction, open
wide your arms, and clasp me for ever! if a kinder power have not
decreed another end, so that after long endurance I may reap my reward,
and again feel my heart beat near the heart of another like to me.

Tiber, the road which is spread by nature’s own hand, threading her
continent, was at my feet, and many a boat was tethered to the banks. I
would with a few books, provisions, and my dog, embark in one of these
and float down the current of the stream into the sea; and then,
keeping near land, I would coast the beauteous shores and sunny
promontories of the blue Mediterranean, pass Naples, along Calabria,
and would dare the twin perils of Scylla and Charybdis; then, with
fearless aim, (for what had I to lose?) skim ocean’s surface towards
Malta and the further Cyclades. I would avoid Constantinople, the sight
of whose well-known towers and inlets belonged to another state of
existence from my present one; I would coast Asia Minor, and Syria,
and, passing the seven-mouthed Nile, steer northward again, till losing
sight of forgotten Carthage and deserted Lybia, I should reach the
pillars of Hercules. And then—no matter where—the oozy caves, and
soundless depths of ocean may be my dwelling, before I accomplish this
long-drawn voyage, or the arrow of disease find my heart as I float
singly on the weltering Mediterranean; or, in some place I touch at, I
may find what I seek—a companion; or if this may not be—to endless
time, decrepid and grey headed—youth already in the grave with those I
love— the lone wanderer will still unfurl his sail, and clasp the
tiller—and, still obeying the breezes of heaven, for ever round another
and another promontory, anchoring in another and another bay, still
ploughing seedless ocean, leaving behind the verdant land of native
Europe, adown the tawny shore of Africa, having weathered the fierce
seas of the Cape, I may moor my worn skiff in a creek, shaded by spicy
groves of the odorous islands of the far Indian ocean.

These are wild dreams. Yet since, now a week ago, they came on me, as I
stood on the height of St. Peter’s, they have ruled my imagination. I
have chosen my boat, and laid in my scant stores. I have selected a few
books; the principal are Homer and Shakespeare—But the libraries of the
world are thrown open to me—and in any port I can renew my stock. I
form no expectation of alteration for the better; but the monotonous
present is intolerable to me. Neither hope nor joy are my
pilots—restless despair and fierce desire of change lead me on. I long
to grapple with danger, to be excited by fear, to have some task,
however slight or voluntary, for each day’s fulfilment. I shall witness
all the variety of appearance, that the elements can assume—I shall
read fair augury in the rainbow— menace in the cloud—some lesson or
record dear to my heart in everything. Thus around the shores of
deserted earth, while the sun is high, and the moon waxes or wanes,
angels, the spirits of the dead, and the ever-open eye of the Supreme,
will behold the tiny bark, freighted with Verney—the LAST MAN.

THE END.




In the beautiful and wild country near Sorrento, in the Kingdom of
Naples, at the time it was governed by monarchs of the house of Anjou,
there lived a territorial noble, whose wealth and power overbalanced
that of the neighboring nobles. His castle, itself a stronghold, was
built on a rocky eminence, toppling over the blue and lovely
Mediterranean. The hills around were covered with ilex-forests, or
subdued to the culture of the olive and vine. Under the sun no spot
could be found more favored by nature.

If at eventide you had passed on the placid wave beneath the castellated
rock that bore the name of Mondolfo, you would have imagined that all
happiness and bliss must reside within its walls, which, thus nestled in
beauty, overlooked a scene of such surpassing loveliness; yet if by
chance you saw its lord issue from the portal, you shrunk from his
frowning brow, you wondered what could impress on his worn cheek the
combat of passions. More piteous sight was it to behold his gentle lady,
who, the slave of his unbridled temper, the patient sufferer of many
wrongs, seemed on the point of entering upon that only repose "where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest."[1] The Prince
Mondolfo had been united early in life to a princess of the regal family
of Sicily. She died in giving birth to a son. Many years subsequently,
after a journey to the northern Italian states, he returned to his
castle, married. The speech of his bride declared her to be a
Florentine. The current tale was that he married her for love, and then
hated her as the hindrance of his ambitious views. She bore all for the
sake of her only child--a child born to its father's hate; a boy of
gallant spirit, brave even to wildness. As he grew up, he saw with anger
the treatment his mother received from the haughty Prince. He dared come
forward as her defender; he dared oppose his boyish courage to his
father's rage: the result was natural--he became the object of his
father's dislike. Indignity was heaped on him; the vassals were taught
to disobey him, the menials to scorn him, his very brother to despise
him as of inferior blood and birth. Yet the blood of Mondolfo was his;
and, though tempered by the gentle Isabel's more kindly tide, it boiled
at the injustice to which he was a victim. A thousand times he poured
forth the overflowings of his injured spirit in eloquent complaints to
his mother. As her health decayed, he nurtured the project, in case of
her death, of flying his paternal castle, and becoming a wanderer, a
soldier of fortune. He was now thirteen. The Lady Isabel soon, with a
mother's penetration, discovered his secret, and on her death-bed made
him swear not to quit his father's protection until he should have
attained the age of twenty. Her heart bled for the wretchedness that she
foresaw would be his lot; but she looked forward with still greater
horror to the picture her active fancy drew of her son at an early age
wandering forth in despair, alone and helpless, suffering all the
extremities of famine and wretchedness; or, almost worse, yielding to
the temptations that in such a situation would be held out to him. She
extracted this vow, and died satisfied that he would keep it. Of all the
world, she alone knew the worth of her Ludovico--had penetrated beneath
the rough surface, and become acquainted with the rich store of virtue
and affectionate feeling that lay like unsunned ore in his sensitive
heart.

Fernando hated his son. From his earliest boyhood he had felt the
sentiment of aversion, which, far from endeavoring to quell, he allowed
to take deep root, until Ludovico's most innocent action became a crime,
and a system of denial and resistance was introduced that called forth
all of sinister that there was in the youth's character, and engendered
an active spirit of detestation in his father's mind. Thus Ludovico
grew, hated and hating. Brought together through their common situation,
the father and son, lord and vassal, oppressor and oppressed, the one
was continually ready to exert his power of inflicting evil, the other
perpetually on the alert to resist even the shadow of tyranny. After the
death of his mother, Ludovico's character greatly changed. The smile
that, as the sun, had then often irradiated his countenance, now never
shone; suspicion, irritability, and dogged resolution, seemed his
master-feelings. He dared his father to the worst, endured that worst,
and prevented from flying by his sacred observance of his vow, nurtured
all angry and even revengeful feelings till the cup of wrath seemed
ready to overflow. He was loved by none, and loving none his good
qualities expired, or slept as if they would never more awaken.

His father had intended him for the Church; and Ludovico, until he was
sixteen, wore the priestly garb. That period past, he cast it aside, and
appeared habited as a cavalier of those days, and in short words told
his parent that he refused to comply with his wishes; that he should
dedicate himself to arms and enterprise. All that followed this
declaration--menace, imprisonment, and even ignominy--he bore, but he
continued firm; and the haughty Fernando was obliged to submit his
towering will to the firmer will of a stripling. And now, for the first
time, while rage seemed to burst his heart, he felt to its highest
degree the sentiment of hatred; he expressed this passion--words of
contempt and boundless detestation replied; and the bystanders feared
that a personal encounter would ensue. Once Fernando put his hand on his
sword, and the unarmed Ludovico drew in and collected himself, as if
ready to spring and seize the arm that might be uplifted against him.
Fernando saw and dreaded the mad ferocity his son's eye expressed. In
all personal encounters of this kind the victory rests not with the
strong, but the most fearless. Fernando was not ready to stake his own
life, or even with his own hand to shed his son's blood; Ludovico, not
as aggressor, but in self-defense, was careless of the consequences of
an attack--he would resist to the death; and this dauntless feeling gave
him an ascendency his father felt and could not forgive.

From this time Fernando's conduct toward his son changed. He no longer
punished, imprisoned, or menaced him. This was usage for a boy, but the
Prince felt that they were man to man, and acted accordingly. He was the
gainer by the change; for he soon acquired all the ascendency that
experience, craft, and a court education, must naturally give him over a
hot-headed youth, who, nerved to resist all personal violence, neither
saw nor understood a more covert mode of proceeding. Fernando hoped to
drive his son to desperation. He set spies over him, paid the tempters
that were to lead him to crime, and by a continued system of restraint
and miserable thwarting hoped to reduce him to such despair that he
would take refuge in any line of conduct that promised freedom from so
irksome and degrading a slavery. His observance of his vow saved the
youth; and this steadiness of purpose gave him time to read and
understand the motives of the tempters. He saw his father's master-hand
in all, and his heart sickened at the discovery.

He had reached his eighteenth year. The treatment he had endured and the
constant exertion of fortitude and resolution had already given him the
appearance of manhood. He was tall, well made, and athletic. His person
and demeanor were more energetic than graceful, and his manners were
haughty and reserved. He had few accomplishments, for his father had
been at no pains for his education; feats of horsemanship and arms made
up the whole catalogue. He hated books, as being a part of a priest's
insignia; he was averse to all occupation that brought bodily repose
with it. His complexion was dark--hardship had even rendered it sallow;
his eyes, once soft, now glared with fierceness; his lips, formed to
express tenderness, were now habitually curled in contempt; his dark
hair, clustering in thick curls round his throat, completed the wild but
grand and interesting appearance of his person.

It was winter, and the pleasures of the chase began. Every morning the
huntsmen assembled to attack the wild-boars or stags which the dogs
might arouse in the fastnesses of the Apennines. This was the only
pleasure that Ludovico ever enjoyed. During these pursuits he felt
himself free. Mounted on a noble horse, which he urged to its full
speed, his blood danced in his veins, and his eyes shone with rapture as
he cast his eagle glance to heaven; with a smile of ineffable disdain,
he passed his false friends or open tormentors, and gained a solitary
precedence in the pursuit.

The plain at the foot of Vesuvius and its neighboring hills was stripped
bare by winter; the full stream rushed impetuously from the hills; and
there was mingled with it the baying of the dogs and the cries of the
hunters; the sea, dark under a lowering sky, made a melancholy dirge as
its waves broke on the shore; Vesuvius groaned heavily, and the birds
answered it by wailing shrieks; a heavy sirocco hung upon the
atmosphere, rendering it damp and cold. This wind seems at once to
excite and depress the human mind: it excites it to thought, but colors
those thoughts, as it does the sky, with black. Ludovico felt this; but
he tried to surmount the natural feelings with which the ungenial air
filled him.

The temperature of the air changed as the day advanced. The clouded sky
spent itself in snow, which fell in abundance; it then became clear, and
sharp frost succeeded. The aspect of earth was changed. Snow covered the
ground and lay on the leafless trees, sparkling, white, and untrod.
Early in the morning a stag had been roused, and, as he was coursed
along the plain skirting the hills, the hunters went at speed. All day
the chase endured. At length the stag, who from the beginning had
directed his course toward the hills, began to ascend them, and, with
various windings and evolutions, almost put the hounds to fault. Day was
near its close when Ludovico alone followed the stag, as it made for the
edge of a kind of platform of the mountain, which, isthmus-like, was
connected with the hill by a small tongue of land, and on three sides
was precipitous to the plain below. Ludovico balanced his spear, and his
dogs drew in, expecting that the despairing animal would there turn to
bay. He made one bound, which conducted him to the very brow of the
precipice--another, and he was seen no more. He sprang downward,
expecting more pity from the rocks beneath than from his human
adversary. Ludovico was fatigued by the chase and angry at the escape of
his prey. He sprang from his horse, tied him to a tree, and sought a
path by which he might safely descend to the plain. Snow covered and hid
the ground, obliterating the usual traces that the flocks or herds might
have left as they descended from their pastures on the hills to the
hamlets beneath; but Ludovico had passed his boyhood among mountains:
while his hunting-spear found sure rest on the ground, he did not fear,
or while a twig afforded him sufficient support as he held it, he did
not doubt to secure his passage; but the descent was precipitous, and
necessary caution obliged him to be long. The sun approached the
horizon, and the glow of its departure was veiled by swift-rising clouds
which the wind blew upward from the sea--a cold wind, which whirled the
snow from its resting-place and shook it from the trees. Ludovico at
length arrived at the foot of the precipice. The snow reflected and
enhanced the twilight, and he saw four deep marks that must have been
made by the deer. The precipice was high above, and its escape appeared
a miracle. It must have escaped; but those were the only marks it had
left. Around lay a forest of ilex, beset by thick, entangled underwood,
and it seemed impossible that any animal so large as the stag in pursuit
could have broken its way through the apparently impenetrable barrier it
opposed. The desire to find his quarry became almost a passion in the
heart of Ludovico. He walked round to seek for an opening, and at last
found a narrow pathway through the forest, and some few marks seemed to
indicate that the stag must have sought for refuge up the glen. With a
swiftness characteristic even of his prey, Ludovico rushed up the
pathway, and thought not of how far he ran, until, breathless, he
stopped before a cottage that opposed itself to his further progress. He
stopped and looked around. There was something singularly mournful in
the scene. It was not dark, but the shades of evening seemed to descend
from the vast woof of cloud that climbed the sky from the west. The
black and shining leaves of the ilex and those of the laurel and myrtle
underwood were strongly contrasted with the white snow that lay upon
them. A breeze passed among the boughs, and scattered the drift that
fell in flakes, and disturbed by fits the silence around; or, again, a
bird twittered, or flew with melancholy flap of wing, beneath the trees
to its nest in some hollow trunk. The house seemed desolate; its windows
were glassless, and small heaps of snow lay upon the sills. There was no
print of footing on the equal surface of the path that led right up to
the door, yet a little smoke now and then struggled upward from its
chimney, and, on paying fixed attention, Prince Ludovico thought he
heard a voice. He called, but received no answer. He put his hand on the
latch; it yielded, and he entered. On the floor, strewed with leaves,
lay a person sick and dying; for, though there was a slight motion in
the eyes that showed that life had not yet deserted his throne, the
paleness of the visage was that of death only. It was an aged woman, and
her white hair showed that she descended to no untimely grave. But a
figure knelt beside her which might have been mistaken for the angel of
heaven waiting to receive and guide the departing soul to eternal rest,
but for the sharp agony that was stamped on the features, and the glazed
but earnest gaze of her eye. She was very young, and beautiful as the
star of evening. She had apparently despoiled herself to bestow warmth
on her dying friend, for her arms and neck were bare but for the
quantity of dark and flowing hair that clustered on her shoulders. She
was absorbed in one feeling, that of watching the change in the sick
person. Her cheeks, even her lips, were pale; her eyes seemed to gaze as
if her whole life reigned in their single perception. She did not hear
Ludovico enter, or, at least, she made no sign that indicated that she
was conscious of it. The sick person murmured; as she bent her head down
to catch the sound, she replied, in an accent of despair:

"I can get no more leaves, for the snow is on the ground; nor have I any
other earthly thing to place over you."

"Is she cold?" said Ludovico, creeping near, and bending down beside the
afflicted girl.

"Oh, very cold!" she replied, "and there is no help."

Ludovico had gone to the chase in a silken mantle lined with the
choicest furs: he had thrown it off, and left it with his horse that it
might not impede his descent. He hastened from the cottage, he ran down
the lane, and, following the marks of his footsteps, he arrived where
his steed awaited him. He did not again descend by the same path,
reflecting that it might be necessary for him to seek assistance for the
dying woman. He led his horse down the bill by a circuitous path, and,
although he did this with all possible speed, night closed in, and the
glare of the snow alone permitted him to see the path that he desired to
follow. When he arrived at the lane he saw that the cottage, before so
dark, was illuminated, and, as he approached, he heard the solemn hymn
of death as it was chanted by the priests who filled it. The change had
taken place, the soul had left its mortal mansion, and the deserted ruin
was attended with more of solemnity than had been paid to the mortal
struggle. Amid the crowd of priests Ludovico entered unperceived, and he
looked around for the lovely female he had left. She sat, retired from
the priests, on a heap of leaves in a corner of the cottage. Her clasped
hands lay on her knees, her head was bent downward, and every now and
then she wiped away her fast-falling tears with her hair. Ludovico threw
his cloak over her. She looked up, and drew the covering round her, more
to hide her person than for the sake of warmth, and then, again turning
away, was absorbed in her melancholy thoughts.

Ludovico gazed on her in pity. For the first time since his mother's
death, tears filled his eyes, and his softened countenance beamed with
tender sympathy. He said nothing, but he continued to look on as a wish
arose in his mind that he might wipe the tears that one by one fell from
the shrouded eyes of the unfortunate girl. As he was thus engaged, he
heard his name called by one of the attendants of the castle, and,
throwing the few pieces of gold he possessed into the lap of the
sufferer, he suddenly left the cottage, and, joining the servant who had
been in search of him, rode rapidly toward his home.

As Ludovico rode along, and the first emotions of pity having, as it
were, ceased to throb in his mind, these feelings merged into the strain
of thought in which he habitually indulged, and turned its course to
something new.

"I call myself wretched," he cried--"I, the well clad and fed, and this
lovely peasant-girl, half famished, parts with her necessary clothing to
cover the dying limbs of her only friend. I also have lost my only
friend, and that is my true misfortune, the cause of all my real
misery--sycophants would assume that name--spies and traitors usurp that
office. I have cast these aside--shaken them from me as you
bough shakes to earth its incumbrance of snow, not as cold as their
iced hearts, but I am alone--solitude gnaws my heart and makes me
savage--miserable--worthless."

Yet, although he thought in this manner, the heart of Ludovico was
softened by what he had seen, and milder feelings pressed upon him. He
had felt sympathy for one who needed it; he had conferred a benefit on
the necessitous, tenderness molded his lips to a smile, and the pride of
utility gave dignity to the fire of his eye. The people about him saw
the change, and, not meeting with the usual disdain of his manner, they
also became softened, and the alteration apparent in his character
seemed ready to effect as great a metamorphosis in his external
situation. But the time was not come when this change would become
permanent.

On the day that succeeded to this hunt, Prince Fernando removed to
Naples, and commanded his son to accompany him. The residence at Naples
was peculiarly irksome to Ludovico. In the country he enjoyed
comparative freedom. Satisfied that he was in the castle, his father
sometimes forgot him for days together; but it was otherwise here.
Fearful that he should form friends and connections, and knowing that
his commanding figure and peculiar manners excited attention and often
curiosity, he kept him ever in sight; or, if he left him for a moment,
he first made himself sure of the people around him, and left such of
his own confidants whose very presence was venom to the eye of Ludovico.
Add to which, Prince Mondolfo delighted to insult and browbeat his son
in public, and, aware of his deficiencies in the more elegant
accomplishments, he exposed him even to the derision of his friends.
They remained two months at Naples, and then returned to Mondolfo.

It was spring; the air was genial and spirit-stirring. The white
blossoms of the almond-trees and the pink ones of the peach just began
to be contrasted with the green leaves that shot forth among them.
Ludovico felt little of the exhilarating effects of spring. Wounded in
his heart's core, he asked nature why she painted a sepulcher; he asked
the airs why they fanned the sorrowful and the dead. He wandered forth
to solitude. He rambled down the path that led to the sea; he sat on the
beach, watching the monotonous flow of the waves; they danced and
sparkled; his gloomy thoughts refused to imbibe cheerfulness from wave
or sun.

A form passed near him--a peasant-girl, who balanced a pitcher,
urn-shaped, upon her head; she was meanly clad, but she attracted
Ludovico's regard, and when, having approached the fountain, she took
her pitcher and turned to fill it, he recognized the cottager of the
foregoing winter. She knew him also, and, leaving her occupation, she
approached him and kissed his hand with that irresistible grace that
southern climes seem to instill into the meanest of their children. At
first she hesitated, and began to thank him in broken accents, but words
came as she spoke, and Ludovico listened to her eloquent thanks--the
first he had heard addressed to him by any human being. A smile of
pleasure stole over his face--a smile whose beauty sank deep into the
gazer's heart. In a minute they were seated on the bank beside the
fountain, and Viola told the story of her poverty-stricken youth--her
orphan lot--the death of her best friend--and it was now only the benign
climate which, in diminishing human wants, made her appear less wretched
than then. She was alone in the world--living in that desolate
cottage--providing for her daily fare with difficulty. Her pale cheek,
the sickly languor that pervaded her manner, gave evidence of the truth
of her words; but she did not weep, she spoke words of good heart, and
it was only when she alluded to the benefaction of Ludovico that her
soft dark eyes swam with tears.

The youth visited her cottage the next day. He rode up the lane, now
grass-grown and scented by violets, which Viola was gathering from the
banks. She presented her nosegay to him. They entered the cottage
together. It was dilapidated and miserable. A few flowers placed in a
broken vase was a type only of poor Viola herself--a lovely blossom in
the midst of utter poverty; and the rose-tree that shaded the window
could only tell that sweet Italy, even in the midst of wretchedness,
spares her natural wealth to adorn her children.

Ludovico made Viola sit down on a bench by the window, and stood
opposite to her, her flowers in his hand, listening. She did not talk of
her poverty, and it would be difficult to recount what was said. She
seemed happy and smiled and spoke with a gleeful voice, which softened
the heart of her friend, so that he almost wept with pity and
admiration. After this, day by day, Ludovico visited the cottage and
bestowed all his time on Viola. He came and talked with her, gathered
violets with her, consoled and advised her, and became happy. The idea
that he was of use to a single human being instilled joy into his heart;
and yet he was wholly unconscious how entirely he was necessary to the
happiness of his _protégée_. He felt happy beside her, he was
delighted to bestow benefits on her, and to see her profit by them; but
he did not think of love, and his mind, unawakened to passion, reposed
from its long pain without a thought for the future. It was not so with
the peasant-girl. She could not see his eyes bent in gentleness on her,
his mouth lighted by its tender smile, or listen to his voice as he bade
her trust in him, for that he would be father, brother, all to her,
without deeply, passionately loving him. He became the sun of her day,
the breath of her life--her hope, joy, and sole possession. She watched
for his coming, she watched him as he went, and for a long time she was
happy. She would not repine that he replied to her earnest love with
calm affection only--she was a peasant, he a noble--and she could claim
and expect no more; he was a god--she might adore him; and it were
blasphemy to hope for more than a benign acceptation of her worship.

Prince Mondolfo was soon made aware of Ludovico's visits to the cottage
of the forest, and he did not doubt that Viola had become the mistress
of his son. He did not endeavor to interrupt the connection, or put any
bar to his visits. Ludovico, indeed, enjoyed more liberty than ever, and
his cruel father confined himself alone to the restricting of him more
than ever in money. His policy was apparent: Ludovico had resisted every
temptation of gambling and other modes of expense thrown in his way.
Fernando had long wished to bring his son to a painful sense of his
poverty and dependence, and to oblige him to seek the necessary funds in
such a career as would necessitate his desertion of the paternal roof.
He had wound many snares around the boy, and all were snapped by his
firm but almost unconscious resistance; but now, without seeking,
without expectation, the occasion came of itself which would lead him to
require far more than his father had at any time allowed him, and now
that allowance was restricted, yet Ludovico did not murmur--and until
now he had had enough.

A long time Fernando abstained from all allusion to the connection of
his son; but one evening, at a banquet, gayety overcame his caution--a
gayety which ever led him to sport with his son's feelings, and to
excite a pain which might repress the smile that his new state of mind
ceased to make frequent visits to his countenance.

"Here," cried Fernando, as he filled a goblet--"here, Ludovico, is to
the health of your violet-girl!" and he concluded his speech with some
indecorous allusion that suffused Ludovico's cheek with red. Without
replying he arose to depart.

"And whither are you going, sir?" cried his father. "Take you cup to
answer my pledge, for, by Bacchus! none that sit at my table shall pass
it uncourteously by."

Ludovico, still standing, filled his cup and raised it as he was about
to speak and retort to his father's speech, but the memory of his words
and the innocence of Viola pressed upon him and filled his heart almost
to bursting. He put down his cup, pushed aside the people who sought to
detain him, and left the castle, and soon the laughter of the revelers
was no more heard by him, though it had loudly rung and was echoed
through the lofty halls. The words of Fernando had awakened a strange
spirit in Ludovico. "Viola! Can she love me? Do I love her?" The last
question was quickly answered. Passion, suddenly awake, made every
artery tingle by its thrilling presence. His cheeks burned and his heart
danced with strange exultation as he hastened toward the cottage,
unheeding all but the universe of sensation that dwelt within him. He
reached its door. Blank and dark the walls rose before him, and the
boughs of the wood waved and sighed over him. Until now he had felt
impatience alone--the sickness of fear--fear of finding a cold return to
his passion's feeling now entered his heart; and, retreating a little
from the cottage, he sat on a bank, and hid his face in his hands, while
passionate tears gushed from his eyes and trickled from between his
fingers. Viola opened the door of her cottage; Ludovico had failed in
his daily visit, and she was unhappy. She looked on the sky--the sun had
set, and Hesperus glowed in the west; the dark ilex-trees made a deep
shade, which was broken by innumerable fire-flies, which flashed now low
on the ground, discovering the flowers as they slept hushed and closed
in night, now high among the branches, and their light was reflected by
the shining leaves of ilex and laurel. Viola's wandering eye
unconsciously selected one and followed it as it flew, and ever and anon
cast aside its veil of darkness and shed a wide pallor around its own
form. At length it nestled itself in a bower of green leaves formed by a
clump of united laurels and myrtles; and there it stayed, flashing its
beautiful light, which, coming from among the boughs, seemed as if the
brightest star of the heavens had wandered from its course, and,
trembling at its temerity, sat panting on its earthly perch. Ludovico
sat near the laurel--Viola saw him--her breath came quick--she spoke
not--but stepped lightly to him--and looked with such mazed ecstasy of
thought that she felt, nay, almost heard, her heart beat with her
emotion. At length she spoke--she uttered his name, and he looked up on
her gentle face, her beaming eyes and her sylph-like form bent over him.
He forgot his fears, and his hopes were soon confirmed. For the first
time he pressed the trembling lips of Viola, and then tore himself away
to think with rapture and wonder on all that had taken place.

Ludovico ever acted with energy and promptness. He returned only to plan
with Viola when they might be united. A small chapel in the Apennines,
sequestered and unknown, was selected; a priest was easily procured from
a neighboring convent and easily bribed to silence. Ludovico led back
his bride to the cottage in the forest. There she continued to reside;
for worlds he would not have had her change her habitation; all his
wealth was expended in decorating it; yet his all only sufficed to
render it tolerable. But they were happy. The small circlet of earth's
expanse that held in his Viola was the universe to her husband. His
heart and imagination widened and filled it until it encompassed all of
beautiful, and was inhabited by all of excellent, this world contains.
She sang to him; he listened, and the notes built around him a magic
bower of delight. He trod the soil of paradise, and its winds fed his
mind to intoxication. The inhabitants of Mondolfo could not recognize
the haughty, resentful Ludovico in the benign and gentle husband of
Viola. His father's taunts were unheeded, for he did not hear them. He
no longer trod the earth, but, angel-like, sustained by the wings of
love, skimmed over it, so that he felt not its inequalities nor was
touched by its rude obstacles. And Viola, with deep gratitude and
passionate tenderness, repaid his love. She thought of him only, lived
for him, and with unwearied attention kept alive in his mind the first
dream of passion.

Thus nearly two years passed, and a lovely child appeared to bind the
lovers with closer ties, and to fill their humble roof with smiles and
joy.

Ludovico seldom went to Mondolfo; and his father, continuing his ancient
policy, and glad that in his attachment to a peasant-girl he had
relieved his mind from the fear of brilliant connections and able
friends, even dispensed with his attendance when he visited Naples.
Fernando did not suspect that his son had married his low-born favorite;
if he had, his aversion for him would not have withheld him from
resisting so degrading an alliance; and, while his blood flowed in
Ludovico's veins, he would never have avowed offspring who were
contaminated by a peasant's less highly-sprung tide.

Ludovico had nearly completely his twentieth year when his elder brother
died. Prince Mondolfo at that time spent four months at Naples,
endeavoring to bring to a conclusion a treaty of marriage he had entered
into between his heir and the daughter of a noble Neapolitan house, when
this death overthrew his hopes, and he retired in grief and mourning to
his castle. A few weeks of sorrow and reason restored him to himself. He
had loved even this favored eldest son more as the heir of his name and
fortune than as his child; and the web destroyed that he had woven for
him, he quickly began another.

Ludovico was summoned to his father's presence. Old habit yet rendered
such a summons momentous; but the youth, with a proud smile, threw off
these boyish cares, and stood with a gentle dignity before his altered
parent.

"Ludovico," said the Prince, "four years ago you refused to take a
priest's vows, and then you excited my utmost resentment; now I thank
you for that resistance."

A slight feeling of suspicion crossed Ludovico's mind that his father
was about to cajole him for some evil purpose. Two years before he would
have acted on such a thought, but the habit of happiness made him
unsuspicious. He bent his head gently.

"Ludovico," continued his father, while pride and a wish to conciliate
disturbed his mind and even his countenance, "my son, I have used you
hardly; but that time is now past."

Ludovico gently replied:

"My father, I did not deserve your ill-treatment; I hope I shall merit
your kindness when I know--"

"Yes, yes," interrupted Fernando, uneasily, "you do not understand--you
desire to know why--in short, you, Ludovico, are now all my
hope--Olympio is dead--the house of Mondolfo has no support but you--"

"Pardon me," replied the youth. "Mondolfo is in no danger; you, my lord,
are fully able to support and even to augment its present dignity."

"You do not understand. Mondolfo has no support but you. I am old, I
feel my age, and these gray hairs announce it to me too glaringly. There
is no collateral branch, and my hope must rest in your children--"

"My children, my lord!" replied Ludovico. "I have only one; and if the
poor little boy--"

"What folly is this?" cried Fernando, impatiently. "I speak of your
marriage and not--"

"My lord, my wife is ever ready to pay her duteous respects to you--"

"Your wife, Ludovico! But you speak without thought. How? Who?"

"The violet-girl, my lord."

A tempest had crossed the countenance of Fernando. That his son, unknown
to him, should have made an unworthy alliance, convulsed every fiber of
his frame, and the lowering of his brows and his impatient gesture told
the intolerable anguish of such a thought. The last words of Ludovico
restored him. It was not his wife that he thus named--he felt assured
that it was not. He smiled somewhat gloomily, still it was a smile of
satisfaction.

"Yes," he replied, "I understand; but you task my patience--you should
not trifle with such a subject or with me. I talk of your marriage. Now
that Olympio is dead, and you are, in his place, heir of Mondolfo, you
may, in his stead, conclude the advantageous, nay, even princely,
alliance I was forming for him."

Ludovico replied with earnestness:

"You are pleased to misunderstand me. I am already married. Two years
ago, while I was still the despised, insulted Ludovico, I formed this
connection, and it will be my pride to show the world how, in all but
birth, my peasant-wife is able to follow the duties of her distinguished
situation."

Fernando was accustomed to command himself. He felt as if stabbed by a
poniard; but he paused till calm and voice returned, and then he said:

"You have a child?"

"An heir, my lord," replied Ludovico, smiling--for his father's mildness
deceived him--"a lovely, healthy boy."

"They live near here?"

"I can bring them to Mondolfo in an hour's space. Their cottage is in
the forest, about a quarter of a mile east of the convent of Santa
Chiara."

"Enough, Ludovico; you have communicated strange tidings, and I must
consider of them. I will see you again this evening."

Ludovico bowed and disappeared. He hastened to his cottage, and related
all that he remembered or understood of this scene, and bade Viola
prepare to come to the castle at an instant's notice. Viola trembled; it
struck her that all was not so fair as Ludovico represented; but she hid
her fears, and even smiled as her husband with a kiss hailed his boy as
heir of Mondolfo.

Fernando had commanded both look and voice while his son was within
hearing. He had gone to the window of his chamber, and stood steadily
gazing on the drawbridge until Ludovico crossed it and disappeared.
Then, unrestrained, he strode up and down the apartment, while the roof
rang with his impetuous tread. He uttered cries and curses, and struck
his head with his clenched fist. It was long ere he could think--he felt
only, and feeling was torture. The tempest at length subsided, and he
threw himself in his chair. His contracted brows and frequently-convulsed
lips showed how entirely he was absorbed in consideration. All at first
was one frightful whirl; by degrees, the motion was appeased; his
thoughts flowed with greater calmness; they subsided into one channel
whose course he warily traced until he thought that he saw the result.

Hours passed during this contemplation. When he arose from his chair, as
one who had slept and dreamed uneasily, his brows became by degrees
smooth; he stretched out his arm, and, spreading his hand, cried:

"So it is! and I have vanquished him!"

Evening came, and Ludovico was announced. Fernando feared his son. He
had ever dreaded his determined and fearless mode of action. He dreaded
to encounter the boy's passions with his own, and felt in the clash that
his was not the master-passion. So, subduing all of hate, revenge, and
wrath, he received him with a smile. Ludovico smiled also; yet there was
no similarity in their look: one was a smile of frankness, joy, and
affection--the other the veiled grimace of smothered malice. Fernando
said:

"My son, you have entered lightly into a marriage as if it were a
child's game, but, where principalities and noble blood are at stake,
the loss or gain is too momentous to be trifled with. Silence, Ludovico!
Listen to me, I entreat. You have made a strange marriage with a
peasant, which, though I may acknowledge, I cannot approve, which must
be displeasing to your sovereign, and derogatory to all who claim
alliance with the house of Mondolfo."

Cold dew stood on the forehead of Fernando as he spoke; he paused,
recovered his self-command, and continued:

"It will be difficult to reconcile these discordant interests, and a
moment of rashness might cause us to lose our station, fortune,
everything! Your interests are in my hands. I will be careful of them. I
trust, before the expiration of a very few months, the future Princess
Mondolfo will be received at the court of Naples with due honor and
respect. But you must leave it to me. You must not move in the affair.
You must promise that you will not, until I permit, mention your
marriage to any one, or acknowledge it if you are taxed with it."

Ludovico, after a moment's hesitation, replied:

"I promise that, for the space of six months, I will not mention my
marriage to any one. I will not be guilty of falsehood, but for that
time I will not affirm it or bring it forward in any manner so as to
annoy you."

Fernando again paused; but prudence conquered, and he said no more. He
entered on other topics with his son; they supped together, and the mind
of Ludovico, now attuned to affection, received all the marks of his
father's awakening love with gratitude and joy. His father thought that
he held him in his toils, and was ready to sweeten the bitterness of his
intended draft by previous kindness.

A week passed thus in calm. Ludovico and Viola were perfectly happy.
Ludovico only wished to withdraw his wife from obscurity from that
sensation of honest pride which makes us desire to declare to the whole
world the excellence of a beloved object. Viola shrank from such an
exhibition; she loved her humble cottage--humble still though adorned
with all that taste and love could bestow on it. The trees bent over its
low roof and shaded its windows, which were filled with flowering
shrubs; its floor shone with marble, and vases of antique shape and
exquisite beauty stood in the niches of the room. Every part was
consecrated by the memory of their first meeting and their loves--the
walks in snow and violets; the forest of ilex with its underwood of
myrtle and its population of fire-flies; the birds; the wild and shy
animals that sometimes came in sight, and, seen, retreated; the changes
of the seasons, of the hues of nature influenced by them; the
alterations of the sky; the walk of the moon; and the moving of the
stars--all were dear, known, and commented on by this pair, who saw the
love their own hearts felt reflected in the whole scene around, and in
their child, their noisy but speechless companion, whose smiles won
hopes, and whose bright form seemed as if sent from heaven to reward
their constant affection.

A week passed, and Fernando and Ludovico were riding together, when the
Prince said:

"Tomorrow, early, my son, you must go to Naples. It is time that you
should show yourself there as my heir, and the best representative of a
princely house. The sooner you do this the quicker will arrive the
period for which, no doubt, you long, when the unknown Princess Mondolfo
will be acknowledged by all. I cannot accompany you. In fact,
circumstances which you may guess make me desire that you should appear
at first without me. You will be distinguished by your sovereign,
courted by all, and you will remember your promise as the best means of
accomplishing your object. In a very few days I will join you."

Ludovico readily assented to this arrangement, and went the same evening
to take leave of Viola. She was seated beneath the laurel tree where
first they had made their mutual vows; her child was in her arms, gazing
with wonder and laughter on the light of the flies. Two years had
passed. It was summer again, and as the beams from their eyes met and
mingled each drank in the joyous certainty that they were still as dear
to one another as when he, weeping from intense emotion, sat under that
tree. He told her of his visit to Naples which his father had settled
for him, and a cloud passed over her countenance, but she dismissed it.
She would not fear; yet again and again a thrilling sense of coming evil
made her heart beat, and each time was resisted with greater difficulty.
As night came on, she carried the sleeping child into the cottage, and
placed him on his bed, and then walked up and down the pathway of the
forest with Ludovico until the moment of his departure should arrive,
for the heat of the weather rendered it necessary that he should travel
by night. Again the fear of danger crossed her, and again she with a
smile shook off the thought; but, when he turned to give her his parting
embrace, it returned with full force on her. Weeping bitterly, she clung
to him, and entreated him not to go. Startled by her earnestness, he
eagerly sought an explanation, but the only explanation she could give
excited a gentle smile as he caressed and bade her to be calm; and then,
pointing to the crescent moon that gleamed through the trees and
checkered the ground with their moving shades, he told her he would be
with her ere its full, and with one more embrace left her weeping. And
thus it is a strange prophecy often creeps about, and the spirit of
Cassandra inhabits many a hapless human heart, and utters from many lips
unheeded forebodings of evils that are to be: the hearers heed them
not--the speaker hardly gives them credit--the evil comes which, if it
could have been avoided, no Cassandra could have foretold, for if that
spirit were not a sure harbinger so would it not exist; nor would these
half revealings have place if the to come did not fulfill and make out
the sketch.

Viola beheld him depart with hopeless sorrow, and then turned to console
herself beside the couch of her child. Yet, gazing on him, her fears
came thicker; and in a transport of terror she rushed from the cottage,
ran along the pathway, calling on Ludovico's name, and sometimes
listening if she might hear the tread of his horse, and then again
shrieking aloud for him to return. But he was far out of hearing, and
she returned again to her cot, and, lying down beside her child,
clasping his little hand in hers, at length slept peacefully.

Her sleep was light and short. She arose before the sun, and hardly had
he begun to cast long shadows on the ground when, attiring herself in
her veil, she was about to go with the infant to the neighboring chapel
of Santa Chiara, when she heard the trampling of horses come up the
pathway; her heart beat quick, and still quicker when she saw a stranger
enter the cottage. His form was commanding, and age, which had grizzled
his hair, had not tempered the fire of his eye nor marred the majesty of
his carriage; but every lineament was impressed by pride and even
cruelty. Self-will and scorn were even more apparent. He was somewhat
like what Ludovico had been, and so like what he then was that Viola did
not doubt that his father stood before her. She tried to collect her
courage, but the surprise, his haughty mien, and, above all, the sound
of many horses, and the voices of men who had remained outside the
cottage, so disturbed and distracted her that her heart for a moment
failed her, and she leaned trembling and ashy white against the wall,
straining her child to her heart with convulsive energy. Fernando spoke:

"You are Viola Arnaldi, and you call yourself, I believe, the wife of
Ludovico Mondolfo?"

"I am so"--her lips formed themselves to these words, but the sound died
away.

Fernando continued:

"I am Prince Mondolfo, father of the rash boy who has entered into this
illegal and foolish contract. When I heard of it my plan was easily
formed, and I am now about to put it into execution. I could easily have
done so without coming to you, without enduring the scene which, I
suppose, I shall endure; but benevolence has prompted me to the line of
conduct I adopt, and I hope that I shall not repent it."

Fernando paused; Viola had heard little of what he had said. She was
employed in collecting her scattered spirits, in bidding her heart be
still, and arming herself with the pride and courage of innocence and
helplessness. Every word he spoke was thus of use to her, as it gave her
time to recollect herself. She only bowed her head as he paused, and he
continued:

"While Ludovico was a younger son, and did not seek to obtrude his
misalliance into notice, I was content that he should enjoy what he
termed happiness unmolested; but circumstances have changed. He has
become the heir of Mondolfo, and must support that family and title by a
suitable marriage. Your dream has passed. I mean you no ill. You will be
conducted hence with your child, placed on board a vessel, and taken to
a town in Spain. You will receive a yearly stipend, and, as long as you
seek no communication with Ludovico, or endeavor to leave the asylum
provided for you, you are safe; but the slightest movement, the merest
yearning for a station you may never fill, shall draw upon you and that
boy the vengeance of one whose menaces are but the uplifted arm--the
blow quickly follows!"

The excess of danger that threatened the unprotected Viola gave her
courage. She replied:

"I am alone and feeble, you are strong, and have ruffians waiting on you
to execute such crimes as your imagination suggests. I care not for
Mondolfo, nor the title, nor the possession, but I will never, oh!
never, never! renounce my Ludovico--never do aught to derogate from our
plighted faith. Torn from him, I will seek him, though it be barefoot
and a-hungered, through the wide world. He is mine by that love he has
been pleased to conceive for me; I am his by the sentiment of devotion
and eternal attachment that now animates my voice. Tear us asunder, yet
we shall meet again, and, unless you put the grave between us, you
cannot separate us."

Fernando smiled in scorn.

"And that boy," he said, pointing to die infant, "will you lead him,
innocent lamb, a sacrifice to the altar of your love, and plant the
knife yourself in the victim's heart?"

Again the lips of Viola became pale as she clasped her boy and
exclaimed, in almost inarticulate accents:

"There is a God in heaven!"

Fernando left the cottage, and it was soon filled by men, one of whom
threw a cloak over Viola and her boy, and, dragging them from the
cottage, placed them in a kind of litter, and the cavalcade proceeded
silently. Viola had uttered one shriek when she beheld her enemies, but,
knowing their power and her own impotence, she stifled all further
cries. When in the litter she strove in vain to disengage herself from
the cloak that enveloped her, and then tried to hush her child, who,
frightened at his strange situation, uttered piercing cries. At length
he slept; and Viola, darkling and fearful, with nothing to sustain her
spirits or hopes, felt her courage vanish. She wept long with despair
and misery. She thought of Ludovico and what his grief would be, and her
tears were redoubled. There was no hope, for her enemy was relentless,
her child torn from her, a cloister her prison. Such were the images
constantly before her. They subdued her courage, and filled her with
terror and dismay.

The cavalcade entered the town of Salerno, and the roar of the sea
announced to poor Viola that they were on its shores.

"O bitter waves!" she cried, "my tears are as bitter as ye, and they
will soon mingle!"

Her conductors now entered a building. It was a watch-tower at some
distance from the town, on the sea-beach. They lifted Viola from the
litter and led her to one of the dreary apartments of the tower. The
window, which was not far from the ground, was grated with iron; it bore
the appearance of a guardroom. The chief of her conductors addressed
her, courteously asked her to excuse the rough lodging; the wind was
contrary, he said, but change was expected, and the next day he hoped
they would be able to embark. He pointed to the destined vessel in the
offing. Viola, excited to hope by his mildness, began to entreat his
compassion, but he immediately left her. Soon after another man brought
in food, with a flask of wine and a jug of water. He also retired; her
massive door was locked, the sound of retreating footsteps died away.

Viola did not despair; she felt, however, that it would need all her
courage to extricate herself from her prison. She ate a part of the food
which had been provided, drank some water, and then, a little refreshed,
she spread the cloak her conductors had left on the floor, placed her
child on it to play, and then stationed herself at the window to see if
any one might pass whom she might address, and, if he were not able to
assist her in any other way, he might at least bear a message to
Ludovico, that her fate might not be veiled in the fearful mystery that
threatened it; but probably the way past her window was guarded, for no
one drew near. As she looked, however, and once advanced her head to
gaze more earnestly, it struck her that her person would pass between
the iron grates of her window, which was not high from the ground. The
cloak, fastened to one of the stanchions, promised a safe descent. She
did not dare make the essay; nay, she was so fearful that she might be
watched, and that, if she were seen near the window, her jailers might
be struck with the same idea, that she retreated to the farther end of
the room, and sat looking at the bars with fluctuating hope and fear,
that now dyed her cheeks with crimson, and again made them pale as when
Ludovico had first seen her.

Her boy passed his time in alternate play and sleep. The ocean still
roared, and the dark clouds brought up by the sirocco blackened the sky
and hastened the coming evening. Hour after hour passed; she, heard no
clock; there was no sun to mark the time, but by degrees the room grew
dark, and at last the Ave Maria tolled, heard by fits between the
howling of the winds and the dashing of the waves. She knelt, and put up
a fervent prayer to the Madonna, protector of innocence--prayer for
herself and her boy--no less innocent than the Mother and Divine Child,
to whom she made her orisons. Still she paused. Drawing near to the
window, she listened for the sound of any human being: that sound, faint
and intermittent, died away, and with darkness came rain that poured in
torrents, accompanied by thunder and lightning that drove every creature
to shelter. Viola shuddered. Could she expose her child during such a
night? Yet again she gathered courage. It only made her meditate on some
plan by which she might get the cloak as a shelter for her boy after it
had served for their descent. She tried the bars, and found that, with
some difficulty, she could pass, and, gazing downward from the outside,
a flash of lightning revealed the ground not far below. Again she
commended herself to divine protection; again she called upon and
blessed her Ludovico; and then, not fearless but determined, she began
her operations. She fastened the cloak by means of her long veil, which,
hanging to the ground, was tied by a slip-knot, and gave way when
pulled. She took her child in her arms, and, having got without the
bars, bound him with the sash to her waist, and then, without accident,
she reached the ground. Having then secured the cloak, and enveloped
herself and her child in its dark and ample folds, she paused
breathlessly to listen. Nature was awake with its loudest voice--the sea
roared--and the incessant flashes of lightning that discovered that
solitude around her were followed by such deafening peals as almost made
her fear. She crossed the field, and kept the sight of the white
sea-foam to her right hand, knowing that she thus proceeded in an
opposite direction from Mondolfo. She walked as fast as her burden
permitted her, keeping the beaten road, for the darkness made her fear
to deviate. The rain ceased, and she walked on, until, her limbs falling
under her, she was fain to rest, and refresh herself with the bread she
had brought with her from the prison. Action and success had inspired
her with unusual energy. She would not fear--she believed herself free
and secure. She wept, but it was the overflowing emotion that found no
other expression. She doubted not that she should rejoin Ludovico.
Seated thus in the dark night--having for hours been the sport of the
elements, which now for an instant paused in their fury--seated on a
stone by the roadside--a wide, dreary, unknown country about her--her
helpless child in her arms--herself having just finished eating the only
food she possessed--she felt triumph, and joy, and love, descend into
her heart, prophetic of future reunion with her beloved.

It was summer, and the air consequently warm. Her cloak had protected
her from the wet, so her limbs were free and unnumbed. At the first ray
of dawn she arose, and at the nearest pathway she struck out of the
road, and took her course nearer the bordering Apennines. From Salerno
as far south as the eye could reach, a low plain stretched itself along
the seaside, and the hills at about the distance of ten miles bound it
in. These mountains are high and singularly beautiful in their shape;
their crags point to heaven and streams flow down their sides and water
the plain below. After several hours' walking, Viola reached a pine
forest, which descended from the heights and stretched itself in the
plain. She sought its friendly shelter with joy, and, penetrating its
depths until she saw trees only on all sides of her, she again reposed.
The sirocco had been dissipated by the thunderstorm, and the sun,
vanquishing the clouds that at first veiled its splendor, glowed forth
in the clear majesty of noon. Southern born, Viola did not fear the
heat. She collected pine nuts, she contrived to make a fire, and ate
them with appetite; and then, seeking a covert, she lay down and slept,
her boy in her arms, thanking Heaven and the Virgin for her escape. When
she awoke, the triumph of her heart somewhat died away. She felt the
solitude, she felt her helplessness, she feared pursuers, yet she dashed
away the tears, and then reflecting that she was too near Salerno--the
sun being now at the sea's verge--she arose and pursued her way through
the intricacies of the wood. She got to the edge of it so far as to be
able to direct her steps by the neighboring sea. Torrents intercepted
her path, and one rapid river threatened to impede it altogether; but,
going somewhat lower down, she found a bridge; and then, approaching
still nearer to the sea, she passed through a wide and desolate kind of
pasture-country, which seemed to afford neither shelter nor sustenance
to any human being. Night closed in, and she was fearful to pursue her
way, but, seeing some buildings dimly in the distance, she directed her
steps thither, hoping to discover a hamlet where she might get shelter
and such assistance as would enable her to retrace her steps and reach
Naples without being discovered by her powerful enemy. She kept these
high buildings before her, which appeared like vast cathedrals, but that
they were untopped by any dome or spire; and she wondered much what they
could be, when suddenly they disappeared. She would have thought some
rising ground had intercepted them, but all before her was plain. She
paused, and at length resolved to wait for dawn. All day she had seen no
human being; twice or thrice she had heard the bark of a dog, and once
the whistle of a shepherd, but she saw no one. Desolation was around
her; this, indeed, had lulled her into security at first. Where no men
were, there was no danger for her. But at length the strange solitude
became painful--she longed to see a cottage, or to find some peasant,
however uncouth, who might answer her inquiries and provide for her
wants. She had viewed with surprise the buildings which had been as
beacons to her. She did not wish to enter a large town, and she wondered
how one could exist in such a desert; but she had left the wood far
behind her, and required food. Night passed--balmy and sweet night--the
breezes fanned her, the glowing atmosphere encompassed her, the
fire-flies flitted round her, bats wheeled about in the air, and the
heavy-winged owl hooped anigh, while the beetle's constant hum filled
the air. She lay on the ground, her babe pillowed on her arm, looking
upon the starry heavens. Many thoughts crowded upon her: the thought of
Ludovico, of her reunion with him, of joy after sorrow; and she forgot
that she was alone, half-famished, encompassed by enemies in a desert
plain of Calabria--she slept.

She awoke not until the sun had risen high--it had risen above the
temples of Pæstum, and the columns threw short shadows on the ground.
They were near her, unseen during night, and were now revealed as the
edifices that had attracted her the evening before. They stood on a
rugged plain, despoiled of all roof, their columns and cornices
encompassing a space of high and weed-grown grass; the deep-blue sky
canopied them and filled them with light and cheerfulness. Viola looked
on them with wonder and reverence; they were temples to some god who
still seemed to deify them with his presence; he clothed them still with
beauty, and what was called their ruin might, in its picturesque
wildness and sublime loneliness, be more adapted to his nature than
when, roofed and gilded, they stood in pristine strength; and the silent
worship of air and happy animals might be more suited to him than the
concourse of the busy and heartless. The most benevolent of spirit-gods
seemed to inhabit that desert, weed-grown area; the spirit of beauty
flitted between those columns embrowned by time, painted with strange
color, and raised a genial atmosphere on the deserted altar. Awe and
devotion filled the heart of lonely Viola; she raised her eyes and heart
to heaven in thanksgiving and prayer--not that her lips formed words, or
her thoughts suggested connected sentences, but the feeling of worship
and gratitude animated her; and, as the sunlight streamed through the
succession of columns, so--did joy, dove-shaped, fall on and illumine
her soul.

With such devotion as seldom before she had visited a saint-dedicated
church, she ascended the broken and rude steps of the larger temple, and
entered the plot that it inclosed. An inner circuit of smaller columns
formed a smaller area, which she entered, and, sitting on a huge
fragment of the broken cornice that had fallen to the ground, she
silently waited as if for some oracle to visit her sense and guide her.

Thus sitting, she heard the near bark of a dog, followed by the bleating
of sheep, and she saw a little flock spread itself in the field
adjoining the farther temple. They were shepherded by a girl clothed in
rags, but the season required little covering; and these poor people,
moneyless, possessing only what their soil gives them, are in the
articles of clothing poor even to nakedness. In inclement weather they
wrap rudely-formed clothes of undressed sheepskin around them--during
the heats of summer they do little more than throw aside these useless
garments. The shepherd-girl was probably about fifteen years of age; a
large black straw hat shaded her head from the intense rays of the sun;
her feet and legs were bare; and her petticoat, tucked up, Diana-like,
above one knee, gave a picturesque appearance to her rags, which, bound
at her waist by a girdle, bore some resemblance to the costume of a
Greek maiden. Rags have a costume of their own, as fine in their way, in
their contrast of rich colors and the uncouth boldness of their drapery,
as kingly robes. Viola approached the shepherdess and quietly entered
into conversation with her; without making any appeal to her charity or
feelings, she asked the name of the place where she was, and her boy,
awake and joyous, soon attracted attention. The shepherd-girl was
pretty, and, above all, good-natured; she caressed the child, seemed
delighted to have found a companion for her solitude, and, when Viola
said that she was hungry, unloaded her scrip of roasted pine nuts,
boiled chestnuts, and coarse bread. Viola ate with joy and gratitude.
They remained together all day; the sun went down, the glowing light of
its setting faded, and the shepherdess would have taken Viola home with
her. But she dreaded a human dwelling, still fearing that, wherever
there appeared a possibility of shelter, there her pursuers would seek
her. She gave a few small silver-pieces, part of what she had about her
when seized, to her new friend, and, bidding her bring sufficient food
for the next day, entreated her not to mention her adventure to any one.
The girl promised, and, with the assistance of her dog, drove the flock
toward their fold. Viola passed the night within the area of the larger
temple.

Not doubting the success of his plan, on the very evening that followed
its execution, Prince Mondolfo had gone to Naples. He found his son at
the Mondolfo Palace. Despising the state of a court, and careless of the
gaieties around him, Ludovico longed to return to the cottage of Viola.
So, after the expiration of two days, he told his father that he should
ride over to Mondolfo, and return the following morning. Fernando did
not oppose him, but, two hours after his departure, followed him, and
arrived at the castle just after Ludovico, leaving his attendants there,
quitted it to proceed alone to his cottage. The first person Prince
Mondolfo saw was the chief of the company who had had the charge of
Viola. His story was soon told: the unfavorable wind, the imprisonment
in a room barricaded with the utmost strength, her incomprehensible
escape, and the vain efforts that had subsequently been made to find
her. Fernando listened as if in a dream; convinced of the truth, he saw
no clue to guide him--no hope of recovering possession of his prisoner.
He foamed with rage, then endeavored to suppress as useless his towering
passion. He overwhelmed the bearer of the news with execrations; sent
out parties of men in pursuit in all directions, promising every reward,
and urging the utmost secrecy, and then, left alone, paced his chamber
in fury and dismay. His solitude was of no long duration. Ludovico burst
into his room, his countenance lighted up with rage.

"Murderer!" he cried, "where is my Viola?"

Fernando remained speechless.

"Answer!" said Ludovico. "Speak with those lips that pronounced her
death-sentence--or raise against me that hand from which her blood is
scarcely washed--Oh, my Viola! thou and my angel-child, descend with all
thy sweetness into my heart, that this hand write not parricide on my
brow!"

Fernando attempted to speak.

"No!" shrieked the miserable Ludovico; "I will not listen to her
murderer. Yet--is she dead? I kneel--I call you father--I appeal to that
savage heart--I take in peace that hand that often struck me, and now
has dealt the death-blow--oh, tell me, does she yet live?"

Fernando seized on this interval of calm to relate his story. He told
the simple truth; but could such a tale gain belief? It awakened the
wildest rage in poor Ludovico's heart. He doubted not that Viola had
been murdered; and, after every expression of despair and hatred, he
bade his father seek his heir among the clods of the earth, for that
such he should soon become, and rushed from his presence.

He wandered to the cottage, he searched the country round, he heard the
tale of those who had witnessed any part of the carrying off of his
Viola. He went to Salerno. He heard the tale there told with the most
determined incredulity. It was the tale, he doubted not, that his father
forged to free himself from accusation, and to throw an impenetrable
veil over the destruction of Viola. His quick imagination made out for
itself the scene of her death. The very house in which she had been
confined had at the extremity of it a tower jutting out over the sea; a
river flowed at its base, making its confluence with the ocean deep and
dark. He was convinced that the fatal scene had been acted there. He
mounted the tower; the higher room was windowless, the iron grates of
the windows had for some cause been recently taken out. He was persuaded
that Viola and her child had been thrown from that window into the deep
and gurgling waters below.

He resolved to die! In those days of simple Catholic faith, suicide was
contemplated with horror. But there were other means almost as sure. He
would go a pilgrim to the Holy Land, and fight and die beneath the walls
of Jerusalem. Rash and energetic, his purpose was no sooner formed than
he hastened to put it in execution. He procured a pilgrim's weeds at
Salerno, and at midnight, advising none of his intentions, he left that
city, and proceeded southward. Alternate rage and grief swelled his
heart. Rage at length died away. She whose murderer he execrated was an
angel in heaven, looking down on him, and he in the Holy Land would win
his right to join her. Tender grief dimmed his eyes. The world's great
theater closed before him--of all its trappings his pilgrim's cloak was
alone gorgeous, his pilgrim's staff the only scepter--they were the
symbols and signs of the power he possessed beyond the earth, and the
pledges of his union with Viola. He bent his steps toward Brundusium. He
walked on fast, as if he grudged all space and time that lay between him
and his goal. Dawn awakened the earth and he proceeded on his way. The
sun of noon darted its ray upon him, but his march was uninterrupted. He
entered a pine wood, and, following the track of flocks, he heard the
murmurs of a fountain. Oppressed with thirst, he hastened toward it. The
water welled up from the ground and filled a natural basin; flowers grew
on its banks and looked on the waters unreflected, for the stream paused
not, but whirled round and round, spending its superabundance in a small
rivulet that, dancing over stones and glancing in the sun, went on its
way to _its_ eternity--the sea. The trees had retreated from the
mountain, and formed a circle about it; the grass was green and fresh,
starred with summer flowers. At one extremity was a silent pool that
formed a strange contrast with the fountain that, ever in motion, showed
no shape, and reflected only the color of the objects around it. The
pool reflected the scene with greater distinctness and beauty than its
real existence. The trees stood distinct, the ambient air between, all
grouped and pictured by the hand of a divine artist. Ludovico drank from
the fount, and then approached the pool. He looked with half wonder on
the scene depicted there. A bird now flitted across in the air, and its
form, feathers, and motion, were shown in the waters. An ass emerged
from among the trees, where in vain it sought herbage, and came to grass
near these waters; Ludovico saw it depicted therein, and then looked on
the living animal, almost appearing less real, less living, than its
semblance in the stream. Under the trees from which the ass had come lay
someone on the ground, enveloped in a mantle, sleeping. Ludovico looked
carelessly--he hardly at first knew why his curiosity was roused; then
an eager thought, which he deemed madness, yet resolved to gratify,
carried him forward. Rapidly he approached the sleeper, knelt down, and
drew aside the cloak, and saw Viola, her child within her arms, the warm
breath issued from her parted lips, her love-beaming eyes hardly veiled
by the transparent lids, which soon were lifted up.

Ludovico and Viola, each too happy to feel the earth they trod, returned
to their cottage--their cottage dearer than any palace--yet only half
believing the excess of their own joy. By turns they wept, and gazed on
each other and their child, holding each other's hands as if grasping
reality and fearful it would vanish.

Prince Mondolfo heard of their arrival. He had long suffered keenly from
the fear of losing his son. The dread of finding himself childless,
heirless, had tamed him. He feared the world's censure, his sovereign's
displeasure--perhaps worse accusation and punishment. He yielded to
fate. Not daring to appear before his intended victim, he sent his
confessor to mediate for their forgiveness, and to entreat them to take
up their abode at Mondolfo. At first, little credit was given to these
offers. They loved their cottage, and had small inclination to risk
happiness, liberty, and life, for worthless luxury. The Prince, by
patience and perseverance, at length convinced them. Time softened
painful recollections; they paid him the duty of children, and cherished
and honored him in his old age; while he caressed his lovely grandchild,
he did not repine that the violet-girl should be the mother of the heir
of Mondolfo.




CHAPTER I

THE FLIGHT FROM BOSWORTH FIELD


     He seemed breathless, heartless, faint and wan,
     And all his armour sprinkled was with blood,
     And soil'd with dirty gore, that no man can
     Discern the hue thereof. He never stood,
     But bent his hasty course towards the idle flood.

                                                    SPENSER.


After a long series of civil dissension--after many battles, whose
issue involved the fate of thousands--after the destruction of nearly
all the English nobility in the contest between the two Roses, the
decisive battle of Bosworth Field was fought on the 22nd of August,
1415, whose result was to entwine, as it was called, the white and red
symbols of rivalship, and to restore peace to this unhappy country.

The day had been sunny and warm: as the evening closed in, a west wind
rose, bringing along troops of fleecy clouds, golden at sunset, and then
dun and grey, veiling with pervious network the many stars. Three
horsemen at this hour passed through the open country between Hinckley
and Welford in Leicestershire. It was broad day when they descended from
the elevation on which the former stands, and the villagers crowded to
gaze upon the fugitives, and to guess, from the ensigns they bore, to
which party they belonged, while the warders from the near castle
hastened out to stop them, thus to curry favour with the conqueror; a
design wholly baffled. The good steeds of the knights, for such their
golden spurs attested them to be, bore them fast and far along the Roman
road, which still exists in those parts to shame our modern builders. It
was dusk when, turning from the direct route to avoid entering Welford,
they reached a ford of the Avon. Hitherto silence had prevailed with the
party--for until now their anxiety to fly had solely occupied their
thoughts. Their appearance spoke of war, nay, of slaughter. Their cloaks
were stained and torn; their armour was disjointed, and parts of it were
wanting; yet these losses were so arbitrary, that it was plain that the
pieces had been hacked from their fastenings. The helm of the foremost
was deprived of its crest; another wore the bonnet of a common soldier,
which ill accorded with the rest of his accoutrements; while the third,
bareheaded, his hair fallings on his shoulders, lank and matted from
heat and exercise, gave more visible tokens of the haste of flight. As
the night grew darker, one of them, and then another, seemed willing to
relax somewhat in their endeavours: one alone continued, with
unmitigated energy, to keep his horse at the same pace they had all
maintained during the broad light of day.

When they reached the ford, the silence was broken by the hindmost
horseman; he spoke in a petulant voice, saying:--"Another half mile at
this pace, and poor Flœur-de-Luce founders; if you will not slacken
your speed, here we part, my friends. God save you till we meet again!"

"Evil betide the hour that separates us, brother!" said the second
fugitive, reining in; "our cause, our peril, our fate shall be the same.
You, my good lord, will consult your own safety." The third cavalier had
already entered the stream: he made a dead halt while his friends spoke,
and then replied:--"Let us name some rendezvous where, if we escape, we
may again meet. I go on an errand of life and death: my success is
doubtful, my danger certain. If I succeed in evading it, where shall I
rejoin you?"

"Though the event of this day has been fatal to the king," answered the
other, "our fortunes are not decided. I propose taking refuge in some
sanctuary, till we perceive how far the earl of Richmond is inclined to
mercy."

"I knew the earl when a mere youth, Sir Humphrey Stafford," said the
foremost rider, "and heard more of him when I visited Brittany, at the
time of King Louis's death, two years ago. When mercy knocks at his
heart, suspicion and avarice give her a rough reception. We must fly
beyond sea, unless we can make further stand. More of this when we meet
again. Where shall that be?"

"I have many friends near Colchester," replied the elder Stafford, "and
St. Mary boasts an asylum there which a crowned head would not dare
violate. Thence, if all else fail, we can pass with ease to the Low
Countries."

"In sanctuary at Colchester--I will not fail you. God bless and
preserve you the while!"

The noble, as he said these words, put spurs to his horse, and without
looking back, crossed the stream, and turning on the skirts of a copse,
was soon out of sight of his companions. He rode all night, cheering his
steed with hand and voice; looking angrily at the early dawning east,
which soon cast from her cloudless brow the dimness of night. Yet the
morning air was grateful to his heated cheeks. It was a perfect summer's
morn. The wheat, golden from ripeness, swayed gracefully to the light
breeze; the slender oats shook their small bells in the air with
ceaseless motion; the birds, twittering, alighted from the full-leaved
trees, scattering dew-drops from the branches. With the earliest dawn,
the cavalier entered a forest, traversing its depths with the hesitation
of one unacquainted with the country, and looked frequently at the sky,
to be directed by the position of the glowing east. A path more worn
than the one he had hitherto followed now presented itself, leading into
the heart of the wood. He hesitated for a few seconds, and then, with a
word of cheer to his horse, pursued his way into the embowering thicket.
After a short space the path narrowed, the meeting branches of the trees
impeded him, and the sudden angle it made from the course he wished to
follow, served to perplex him still farther; but as he vented his
impatience by hearty Catholic exclamations, a little tinkling bell spoke
of a chapel near, and of the early rising of the priest to perform the
matin service at its altar. The horse of the fugitive, a noble
war-steed, had long flagged; and hunger gnawed at the rider's own
heart, for he had not tasted food since the morning of the previous day.
These sounds, therefore, heard in so fearless a seclusion, bore with
them pleasant tidings of refreshment and repose. He crossed himself in
thankfulness; then throwing himself from his horse (and such change was
soothing to his stiffened limbs), he led him through the opening glade
to where a humble chapel and a near adjoining hut stood in the bosom of
the thicket, emblems of peace and security.

The cavalier tied his horse to a tree, and entered the chapel. A
venerable priest was reading the matin service; one old woman composed
his congregation, and she was diligently employed telling her beads. The
bright rays of the newly-risen sun streamed through the eastern window,
casting the chequered shadow of its lattice work on the opposite wall.
The chapel was small and rustic; but it was kept exquisitely clean: the
sacred appurtenances of the altar also were richer than was usual, and
each shrine was decked with clusters of flowers, chiefly composed of
white roses. No high praise, indeed, was due to the rude picture of the
Virgin of the Annunciation, or of the Announcing Angel, a representation
of whom formed the altar-piece; but in barbaric England, in those days,
piety stood in place of taste, and that which represented Our Lady
received honour, however unworthy it might be of the inspiress of
Raphael or Correggio. The cavalier took his disornamented casque from
his head, placed it on the ground, and knelt reverentially on the bare
earth. He had lately escaped from battle and slaughter, and he surely
thought that he had especial motive for thanksgiving; so that if his
lips uttered a mere soldier's "Ave," still it had the merit of fervour
and sincerity.

Had he been less occupied by his own feelings, he might have remarked
the many glances the priest cast on him, who dishonoured his learning
and piety by frequent mistakes of language, as his thoughts wandered
from his breviary, to observe with deep attention his unexpected
visitor. At length the service ended: the old dame rose from her knees,
and satisfied her curiosity, which she had excited by many a look
askance, by a full and long gaze on the cavalier. His hewn armour, torn
cloak, and, unseemly for the sacred spot, the dread stains on his
garments and hands, were all minutely scanned. Nor did his personal
appearance escape remark. His stature was tall, his person well knit,
showing him to be a man of about thirty years of age. His features were
finely moulded, his grey eyes full of fire, his step had the dignity of
rank, and his look expressed chivalrous courage and frankness. The good
woman had not been long engaged in surveying the stranger, when her
pastor beckoned her to retire, and himself advanced, replying to the
soldier's salute with a benedicite, and then hastily inquiring if he
came from the field.

"Even so, father," said the cavalier; "I come from the field of the
bloody harvest. Has any intelligence of it travelled hither so speedily?
If so, I must have wandered from the right road, and am not so far on my
journey as I hoped."

"I have only heard that a battle was expected," said the priest, "and
your appearance tells me that it is over. The fortunes, nay, perhaps the
life of a dear friend are involved in its issue, and I fear that it is
adverse--for you fly from pursuit, and methinks, though stained with
dust and blood, that emblem on your breast is the White Rose."

The warrior looked on the old man, whose dignity and language were at
variance with his lowly destination; he looked partly in wonder, and
partly to assure himself of his questioner's sincerity. "You are weary,
Sir Knight," added the monk, whose experienced eyes had glanced to the
golden spurs of his visitant; "come to my hermitage, there to partake of
such refreshment as I can bestow. When your repast is ended, I will, by
confidence on my part, merit yours."

This invitation was that of worldly courtesy, rather than the rustic
welcome of a recluse monk. The cavalier thanked him cordially, adding,
that he must first provide food and water for his horse, and that
afterwards he would gratefully accept his host's invitation. The old man
entered with the spirit of a soldier into his guest's anxiety for his
steed, and assisted in purveying to its wants, ingratiating himself
meanwhile with its master, by discovering and praising scientifically
its points of beauty. The poor animal showed tokens of over fatigue, yet
still he did not refuse his food, and the cavalier marked with joy that
his eye grew brighter and his knees firmer after feeding.

They then entered the cottage, and the soldier's eye was attracted from
more sacred emblems by a sword which was suspended over a picture of the
Virgin:--"You belong to our Chivalry!" he exclaimed, while his
countenance lighted up with joyful recognition.

"Now I belong to the holy order whose badge I wear," the monk replied,
pointing to his Benedictine dress. "In former days I followed a brave
leader to the field, and, in his service, incurred such guilt, as I now
try to expiate by fasting and prayer."

The monk's features were convulsed by agitation as he spoke, then
crossing his arms on his breast, he was absorbed in thought for a few
moments, after which he raised his head and resumed the calm and even
serene look that characterized him. "Sir Knight," said he, motioning to
the table now spread for the repast, "I have but poor fare to offer, but
a soldier will not disdain its meagreness. My wine I may praise, as
being the produce of a generous vintage; I have kept it sealed, to open
it on occasions like the present, and rejoice that your strength will be
recruited by it."

Bread, fruits, cheese, and a flagon of the wine, which merited the
giver's eulogium, composed the fugitive's breakfast, whose fatigue
required cordial and repose. As he was occupied by his repast, his host
eyed him with evident agitation, eager yet fearful to question him on
the subject of the battle. At length he again asked, "You come from the
field on which the forces of the king and of the earl of Richmond met?"

"I do."

"You fought for the White Rose, and you fly?"

"I fought for the White Rose till it was struck to the ground. The king
has fallen with his chief nobility around him. Few Yorkists remain to
mourn the success of the Lancastrians."

Deep grief clouded the old man's countenance, but accustomed to subdue
his feelings, as one on whom, being stricken by an overwhelming misery,
all subsequent disasters fall blunted, he continued with greater
calmness: "Pardon me, noble gentleman, if I appear to ask an indiscreet
question. You are of lordly bearing, and probably filled a place near
the royal person. Did you hear, on the night before last, aught of the
arrival of a stranger youth at the king's tent?"

The knight eyed the old man with a quick glance, asking, in his turn,
"Are you, then, the foster-father of King Richard's son?"

"Did you see my boy?" cried the priest. "Did his father acknowledge
him?--Where is he now?--Did he enter the ranks to fight and fall for
his parent?"

"On the night of which you speak," said the stranger, evading the
immediate question, "the king placed his son's hand in mine, as I vowed
to protect and guard him if ill befell our party, as it has befallen."

"Surely some presentiment of evil haunted the king's mind."

"I do believe it; for his manner was solemn and affecting. He bade the
youth remember that he was a Plantagenet, and spoke proudly of the
lineage from which he sprung. The young esquire listened intently,
looking at his father with such an ingenuous and thoughtful expression,
that he won my heart to love him."

"Now bless thee, Sir Knight, whoever thou art, for this praise of my
poor Edmund. I pray you, hasten to tell me what more passed."

The cavalier continued his account; but his manner was serious, as if
the conclusion of his tale would afflict his auditor. He related how, on
quitting the royal tent, he had led Edmund Plantagenet to his own,
there to converse with him awhile, the better to learn whether his
bearing and speech showed promise of future merit. King Richard had
enjoined his son to return to his seclusion early on the following
morning; but as soon as he entered his conductor's tent, he knelt to him
and asked a boon, while tears gathered in his eyes, and his voice was
broken by the fervour of his desire. The noble was moved by his
entreaties, and promised to grant his request, if it did not militate
against his honour and allegiance. "It is for honour that I speak," said
Plantagenet; "I am older in years than in seeming, for already I number
twenty summers; and, spite of my boyish look, I am familiar with martial
exercises, and the glorious promise of war. Let me draw my sword for my
father to-morrow--let me, at your side, prove myself a worthy
descendant of the conquerors of France! Who will fight for King Richard
with greater courage, fidelity, and devotion, than his acknowledged and
duteous son?" The cavalier yielded to his noble yearnings. Clothed in
armour he entered the ranks, and hovered a protecting angel near his
parent during the bloody contest. And now, as his venerable guardian
watched with trembling eagerness the countenance of his guest while he
told his tale, and the stranger, with bitter regret, was about to relate
that he had seen Plantagenet felled to the ground by a battle-axe, quick
steps, and then a knocking, was heard at the cottage door. The stranger
started on his feet, and put his hand upon his sword; but a bright smile
illuminated the monk's face, as the very youth of whom they spoke,
Edmund Plantagenet, rushed into the apartment. His soiled garments and
heated brow spoke of travel and fatigue, while his countenance wore an
expression of wildness and even of horror. He started when he saw the
stranger, but quickly recognized him as his new friend. "Thank God!" he
cried, "that you, my dear lord, have not fallen into the hands of, the
sacrilegious usurper! It is my father's spirit that has saved you for
his son's sake, that I may not be utterly abandoned and an orphan."

With milder accost he bent his knee to his holy guardian, and then
turned to answer the cavalier's questions of how he had escaped death
from the blow he had received, and what new events had occurred since he
had quitted the field early on the preceding day?--while the monk chid
him for his disobedience to his father's commands, in having mingled
with the fray. The eyes of Plantagenet flashed fire at this
reproach.--"Could I know that my father's crown and life," he exclaimed
impetuously, "depended on the combat, and not bring to his aid my weak
arm? God of Heaven! had there been five hundred true as I, we might all
have fallen round him: but never, never, should I have seen the sight
which last night I saw--nor heard the sounds I last night heard!"

The youth covered his face with his hands, and the boiling tears
trickled between his fingers. "Tell me," cried the noble, "what has
happened?--and swiftly tell me, for I loiter here too long."

Almost suffocated by emotion, Plantagenet related, that when he
recovered from the trance into which the fearful blow he had received
had thrown him, the earl's camp-followers were busy among the slain: and
that he had seen the body of King Richard--of his father--thrown
half-naked across a mule, thus to be borne to be exposed to the public
gaze and mockery in Leicester, where, but the day before, he had ridden
with the royal crown on his head, the acknowledged sovereign of England.
And that crown, base, ill-bartered bauble, having been found in the tent
by Lord Stanley, he had brought and placed on Richmond's head, while the
soldiers, with one acclaim, hailed him Henry the Seventh, King of
England.

The last words more than the others, for the death of his royal master
was already known to him, moved the knight:--"Is this the end of our
hopes?" he cried. "Am I then too late? Farewell, my friends!
Plantagenet, I shall never forget my oath to the king; I shall become, I
fear, an outcast and a soldier of fortune, even if I escape worse fate;
but claim when you will, and it shall be yours, whatever protection I
can afford you."

"Yield, then. Lord Lovel," said the youth, "to my first request. You are
in peril, let me share it; permit me to accompany you. If you refuse, my
plan is already formed; I repair to the earl of Lincoln, whom King
Richard named his successor, and offer myself as a soldier in his
attempt to discrown the usurping Henry, and to raise again the White
Rose to its rightful supremacy."

"To the earl of Lincoln--the successor of Richard--to him you would
repair? It is well--come with me now, and I will present you to that
nobleman. If your foster-father consents, bid adieu to this seclusion
for a time, and accompany me to London, to new contests--to the combat
of right against might--to success and honour, or to defeat and death!"

The sun had risen high when, having taken leave of the venerable monk,
who would not oppose his pupil's gallant spirit of enterprise, Lord
Lovel and young Plantagenet threaded the forest paths, which, by a safer
and a shorter route than the highway, took them on their road to London.
For a time they led their horses with difficulty through the entangled
thicket, when at last reaching the open road, they mounted, and Lord
Lovel, who was desirous of estimating the abilities and disposition of
his companion, entered into conversation with him. They first conversed
on the sad changes which were the work of the eventful day of battle;
afterwards the cavalier led Edmund to speak of himself, his early life,
his acquirements, and his hopes.

When Plantagenet was but ten years old his mother died, and her last
request to the father of her boy, founded on a deep knowledge of the
world, was, that her son might be educated far from the court, nor be
drawn from the occupations and happier scenes of private life, to become
a hanger-on of princes and nobles. There was a man, a gentleman and a
knight, who had been a partizan of the White Rose, and who had fought
and bled for it in various battles between the duke of York and Henry
the Sixth. In one of these, the misery of the times, and horrible
consequences of civil dissension, caused him unwittingly to lift his
armed hand against his twin brother, nor did he discover the mistake
till, with his dying voice, that brother called on him to assist him
against his slayer. A life of seclusion, penance, and prayer, alone
blunted his sense of remorse, and quitting the world, he retired to a
monastery, where after due noviciate he took vows, and then shrinking
from commerce with his kind, followed by visions that spoke for ever to
him of his unnatural crime, he retreated to the forest of
Leicestershire, to dwell alone with his grief and his repentance.

His retreat was known to many of his friends, and chance had brought the
duke of Gloucester at one time to visit him; when the ancient warrior
rejoiced with enthusiasm at the exaltation of the party to which he was
attached. The death of the mother of Edmund had the effect of softening
the duke's heart, of making for a short interval worldly cares and
objects distasteful to him, and of filling him with a desire of
seclusion and peace. If he was unable to enjoy these himself, he
resolved that at least his child should not be drawn by him into the
thorny path of rivalship and ambition. His mother's last injunction
strengthened this feeling; and the duke, visiting again the hermit of
the wood, induced him to take charge of Edmund, and bringing him up in
ignorance of his real parentage, to bestow such education on him as
would enable him to fill with reputation an honourable, if not a
distinguished station in society. This order of things was not changed
by Richard's exaltation to the crown. On the contrary, the dangers he
incurred from his usurpation made him yet more anxious to secure a
peaceful existence for his offspring. When, however, his legitimate son,
whom he had created prince of Wales, died, paternal affection awoke
strong in his heart, and he could not resist his desire of seeing
Edmund: a memorable visit for the priest-bred nursling of the forest! It
gave him a link with society, with which before he had felt no
connexion: his imagination and curiosity were highly excited. His
revered friend, yielding to his eager demands, was easily enticed to
recur to the passed scenes of an eventful life. The commencement of the
wars of the two Roses, and their dreadful results, furnished
inexhaustible topics of discourse. Plantagenet listened with breathless
interest, although it was not till the eve of the battle of Bosworth,
that he knew how indissolubly his own fortunes were linked with those of
the house of York.

The events of the few last days had given him a new existence. For the
first time, feeling was the parent of action; and a foregoing event
drove him on to the one subsequent. He was excited to meditate on a
thousand schemes, while the unknown future inspired him with an awe that
thrilled his young heart with mingled pain and pleasure. He uttered his
sentiments with the ingenuousness of one who had never been accustomed
to converse with any but a friend; and as he spoke, his dark and
thoughtful eyes beamed with a tempered fire, that showed him capable of
deep enthusiasm, though utter want of knowledge of the world must make
him rather a follower than a leader.

They rode on meanwhile, the noble cavalier and gentle squire indulging
in short repose. The intense fatigue Edmund at first endured, seemed to
be subdued by the necessity of its continuance, nor did it prevent him
from conversing with Lord Lovel. He was anxious thoroughly to understand
the immediate grounds of the earl of Richmond's invasion, and to
ascertain the relative position of the remaining chiefs of the White
Rose: "Where," he asked, "are Edward the Fourth's children?"

"The elder of these," Lord Lovel replied, "the Lady Elizabeth, is, by
direction of her uncle, at Sheriff Hutton, in Yorkshire."

"And where are the princes? Edward, who was proclaimed king, and his
younger brother?"

"They were long imprisoned in the Tower. Young Edward died there more
than a year ago."

"And the Duke of York?"

"He is supposed to have died also: they were both sickly boys."

Lord Lovel said these words in a grave voice, and suspicion would have
been instilled into any but the unsuspecting Edmund, of some covert
meaning. After a short pause, he continued:--"the question of the
succession stands thus. Your father, the duke of Gloucester, threw the
stigma of illegitimacy on King Edward's children, and thus took from
them their right of inheriting the crown. The attainder of the duke of
Clarence was considered reason sufficient why his children should be
excluded from the throne, and their uncle, in consequence, became, by
right of birth, king of England: his son he created prince of Wales. We
submitted; for a child like Edward the Fifth could scarcely be supported
against an experienced warrior, a man of talent, a sage and just king,
but at the expense of much blood. The wounds inflicted by the opposing
houses of York and Lancaster were yet, as the late successful rebellion
proves, unhealed; and had the Yorkists contended among themselves, they
would yet sooner have lost the supremacy they so hardly acquired:
Richard therefore received our oaths of allegiance. When his son died,
the question of who was the heir to the crown became agitated; and the
king at first declared the earl of Warwick, the son of the duke of
Clarence, to be his successor. It was a dangerous step--and the
imprudent friends of the young earl made it more so--to name him to
succeed, who, if he were permitted at any time to wear the crown, might
claim precedence of him who possessed it. Poor Warwick paid the penalty
of youth and presumption: he is now a prisoner at Sheriff Hutton; and
John de la Poole, earl of Lincoln, son of Richard's sister, and by the
removal of the children of his elder brothers, his heir by law was
nominated to succeed his uncle. I am now proceeding to him. I am
ignorant of the conduct he will pursue; whether he will make head
against this Lancastrian king, or----. Lincoln is a noble cavalier; a
man whom bright honour clothes; he is brave, generous, and good. I shall
guide myself by his counsels and resolves; and you, it appears, will
follow my example."

After a pause, Lord Lovel continued: "After the death or disappearance
of his princely nephews, the king, wishing to confirm his title, was
ready to take the stigma thrown on their birth from his brother's
daughters, and to marry his niece, the Lady Elizabeth. Her mother at
first resisted, but the prospect of seeing her children restored to
their rights, and herself to her lost dignity, overcame her objections,
and the princess yielded a willing consent. Meanwhile, the Yorkists, who
joined the earl of Richmond, extorted from him a vow that he would make
King Edward's daughter his queen; and even the Lancastrians, thinking
thus to secure a king of their own, are eager for this union: yet the
earl hates us all so cordially that he was hardly brought to consent.
Should he, now that he has declared himself king, evade his promise, the
children of Elizabeth Woodville will suffer the stain of illegitimacy;
but if the marriage has place, and this unhappy race is restored to
their honours and rights, our self-named sovereign may find that his own
hands have dug the pit into which he will fall."

A long silence succeeded to these explanations. The last expression used
by Lovel inspired Edmund with wonder and curiosity; but the noble
pressing his horse to a swifter pace, did not hear his observations, or
hearing them, replied only by saying, "Three hours' good riding will
bring us to London. Courage, Plantagenet! slacken not your speed, my
good boy; soft ease will follow this hard labour."

The young moon in its first quarter was near its setting when they
arrived at London. They approached from Edgware: without entering the
town, they skirted its northern extremity, till Lord Lovel, checking his
horse, remarked to his companion, that he judged it fitting to delay
approaching the residence of the earl of Lincoln, until the setting of
the moon and subsequent darkness secured them from observation.




CHAPTER II

THE CONFERENCE


                      Yes, my good Lord,
     It doth contain a king: King Richard lies
     Within the limits of yon lime and stone.

                                           SHAKSPEARE.


The earl of Lincoln, declared by Richard the Third, heir to the crown,
did not join the royal forces, nor appear at the battle of Bosworth.
This distinguished prince was a man of singular abilities and strength
of mind, which chivalrous generosity adorned with a lustre superior even
to that which he derived from his high rank. Lord Lovel was possessed of
knightly courage, untarnished honour, and gentlemanly accomplishment. To
these military and graceful qualities Lincoln added the wisdom of a
statesman and the moral energy resulting from inflexible principle. He
felt himself responsible to mankind and to all posterity for his
actions. He was brave--that was a virtue of the times; but he was just,
in a comprehensive sense of the word, and that exalted him above them.
His manly features did not so much wear the stamp of beauty, though,
like all the offspring of the House of York, he was handsome, as of the
best quality of man, a perception of right, and resolution to achieve
that right.

Lord Lincoln disapproved decidedly of the usurpation of his uncle,
Richard the Third, over the children of Edward the Fourth. He allowed
that the evidence was strong in favour of that king's former marriage,
and their consequent illegitimacy; but he said, that Elizabeth Woodville
had so long been held queen of England, and her children heirs to the
crown, that it was impossible to eradicate the belief of the English
people, that their allegiance was due to him who had been proclaimed
even by his uncle, Edward the Fifth. Even if they were put aside, the
attainder passed against the duke of Clarence was an insufficient reason
to deprive his son of his lawful inheritance. He saw England wasted, and
her nobility extirpated by civil contest; and he perceived the seeds of
future strife in the assumption of the crown by the duke of Gloucester.
When the son of Richard the Third died, and the earl of Warwick was
named his successor, the superior right of the nephew before the
reigning uncle became so eminent a subject of discussion, that the king
was obliged to recall his declaration, and to confine the young prince
in a castle in Yorkshire. The earl of Lincoln, then seven and twenty
years of age, was next named. He remonstrated with his uncle privately;
but fear of dividing the House of York against itself, and a disdain to
make common cause with the dowager queen's relations, made him outwardly
submit; but his plan was formed, and secretly all his efforts tended
towards the restoring the children of Edward to their paternal rights.

The boys were sickly. Edward the Fifth, irritated by the extinction of
the hopes which the intrigues of his mother had kept alive in his
breast, wasted by imprisonment in the Tower, and brooking with untamed
pride the change from a regal to a private station, pined and died.
Richard, duke of York, was between ten and eleven; a sprightly,
ingenuous boy, whose lively spirit wore out his frame, and this, added
to confinement and attention to his dying brother, brought him also near
the grave. It was on the death of Edward, that the earl of Lincoln
visited the Tower, and saw young Richard. The accounts given by the
attendants of his more than a child's devotion to his brother, his
replies full of sportive fancy, his beauty, though his cheek was faded
and his person grown thin, moved the generous noble to deep compassion.
He ventured, under the strong influence of this feeling, to remonstrate
warmly with his royal uncle, reproaching him with needless cruelty, and
telling him how in fact, though not in appearance, he was the murderer of
his nephews, and would be so held by all mankind. Richard's ambition was
satisfied by the success of his measures to obtain the crown; but his
fears were awake. The duke of Buckingham was in arms against him--the
queen and her surviving relatives were perpetually employed in exciting
discontents in the kingdom. Richard feared that if they obtained the
person of his nephew, he would be turned into an engine for his
overthrow; while to obtain possession of him was the constant aim of
their endeavours. He earnestly desired to reconcile himself to the
queen, and to draw her from the sanctuary in which she had immured
herself--she refused all his offers, unless her son was first placed in
her hands.

His head, ripe with state plots, now conceived a scheme. He consented
that Lincoln should take the duke of York under his charge, if he would
first engage to keep his removal from the Tower, and even his existence,
a secret from his enemies. Lincoln made the required promise; the young
prince was conveyed to a country seat belonging to the earl, and
Richard, in furtherance of his plan, caused a rumour to go abroad that
he also was dead. No one knew with whom this report originated. When, to
assure themselves, various nobles visited the Tower, the boy was no
longer there. The queen gave credit to the tale. At this moment, Richard
set on foot a negotiation of marriage with the eldest daughter of Edward
the Fourth, the Lady Elizabeth. The partizans of the earl of Richmond
sought to ensure the success of his enterprise by the same means: and
while little Richard grew in health and happiness in his country
retreat, his own nearest and most attached relatives were giving away
his inheritance--his uncle unwittingly laid the foundation-stone of the
reputation of cruelty and murder ever after affixed to him; and his
mother, endeavouring to exalt her daughter, and to restore herself to
her lost station in the kingdom, sealed the fatal decree that first
deprived her son of his rights, and afterwards of his life.

On the evening that Lord Lovel and Edmund Plantagenet entered London,
the earl of Lincoln remained waiting intelligence from the field, in a
palace he inhabited not far from Tottenham Court, a secluded habitation,
surrounded by a garden and a high wall. This was an irksome situation
for a warrior; but though his uncle loved, he distrusted him: his
projected marriage with the Lady Elizabeth would probably cause him
again to be father of an heir to the crown, and knowing that Lincoln
possessed, in the young duke of York, a dangerous rival, he refused to
allow him to take up arms against Richmond. Lord Lincoln was alone,
pacing his large and vaulted hall in deep and anxious meditation. He,
who with conscience for his rule, takes, or endeavours to take, the
reins of fate into his own hands, must experience frequent misgivings;
and often feel that he wheels near the edge of a giddy precipice, down
which the tameless steeds he strives to govern may, in an instant, hurl
him and all dependent upon his guidance. The simple feeling of
compassion, arising from the seeing childhood lose its buoyancy in undue
confinement, had first led the princely noble to take charge of his
young cousin. Afterwards, when he beheld the boy grow in health and
years, developing the while extraordinary quickness of intellect, and a
sweet, ingenuous disposition, he began to reflect on the station he
held, his rights and his injuries; and then the design was originated on
which he was now called to act.

If Richard gained the day, all would stand as before. Should he be
defeated--and that second sense, that feeling of coming events, which
is one of the commonest, though the least acknowledged of the secret
laws of our nature, whispered the yet unrevealed truth to him--who then
would assume England's diadem, and how could he secure it for its
rightful owner, the only surviving son of Edward the Fourth? All these
reflections coursed themselves through his brain, while, with the zeal
of a partizan, and the fervour of one wedded to the justice of his
cause, he revolved every probable change of time and fortune.

At this moment a courier was announced: he brought tidings from the
field. As is usual on the eve of a great event, they were dubious and
contradictory. The armies faced each other, and the battle was
impending. The doubts entertained on both sides, as to the part that
Lord Stanley would take, gave still a greater uncertainty to the
anticipations of each.

Soon after the arrival of this man, the loud ringing at the outer gate
was renewed; and the trampling of horses, as they entered the court,
announced a more numerous company. There was something in the movements
of his domestics that intimated to the earl that his visitor was of
superior rank. Could it be the king, who had fled; conquered, and a
fugitive? Could such terms be applied to the high-hearted Richard? The
doors of the hall were thrown open, and the question answered by the
entrance of his visitant: it was a woman; and her name, "Lady Brampton!"
in a tone of wonder, burst from the noble's lips.

"Even I, my good lord," said the lady; "allow me your private ear; I
bring intelligence from Leicestershire. All is lost," she continued,
when the closing of the door assured her of privacy; "all is lost, and
all is gained--Richard is slain. My emissaries brought swift
intelligence of this event to me at Northampton, and I have hastened
with it hither, that without loss of time you may act."

There was a quickness and a decision in the lady's manner, that checked
rather than encouraged her auditor. She continued: "Vesper hour has long
passed--it matters not--London yet is ours. Command instantly that
Richard the Fourth be proclaimed king of England."

Lord Lincoln started at these words. The death of his uncle and
benefactor could not be received by him like the loss of a move at
chess; a piece lost, that required the bringing up of other pieces to
support a weak place. "The king is slain," were words that rang in his
ears: drowning every other that the lady uttered with rapidity and
agitation. "We will speak of that anon," he replied; and going to the
high window of his hall, he threw it open, as if the air oppressed him.
The wind sighed in melancholy murmurs among the branches of the elms and
limes in the garden: the stars were bright, and the setting moon was
leaving the earth to their dim illumination. "Yesternight," thought
Lincoln, "he was among us, a part of our conversation, our acts, our
lives; now his glazed eyes behold not these stars. The past is his: with
the present and the future he has no participation."

Lady Brampton's impatience did not permit the earl long to indulge in
that commune with nature, which we eagerly seek when grief and death
throws us back on the weakness of our human state, and we feel that we
ourselves, our best laid projects and loftiest hopes, are but the
playthings of destiny. "Wherefore," cried the lady, "does De la Poole
linger? Does he hesitate to do his cousin justice? Does he desire to
follow in the steps of his usurping predecessor? Wherefore this delay?"

"To strike the surer," replied Lincoln. "May not I ask, wherefore this
impatience?"

Even as he spoke, steps were heard near the apartment; and while the
eyes of both were turned with inquietude on the expected intruder, Lord
Lovel entered: there was no triumph, no eager anticipation on his
brow--he was languid from ill success and fatigue. Lincoln met him with
the pleasure of one who sees his friend escaped from certain death. He
was overjoyed to be assured of his existence; he was glad to have his
assistance on the present emergency. "We know," he said, "all the evil
tidings you bring us; we are now deliberating on the conduct we are to
pursue: your presence will facilitate our measures. Tell me what other
friends survive to aid us. The duke of Norfolk, the Staffords, Sir
Robert Brakenbury, where are they?"

Lovel had seen the duke fall, the Staffords had accompanied his flight;
uncertainty still hung over the fate of many others. This detail of the
death of many of their common friends, subdued the impetuosity of the
lady, till an account of how Richard himself had fought and been slain
recalled her to their former topic of discussion; and, again, she said,
"It is strange that you do not perceive the dangers of delay. Why is not
the king proclaimed?"

"Do you not know," asked Lord Lovel, "that the king is proclaimed?"

Lady Brampton clasped her hands, exclaiming, "Then Richard the Fourth
will wear his father's crown!"

"Henry the Seventh," said Lovel, "possesses and wears the English crown.
Lord Stanley placed the diadem on the head of the earl of Richmond, and
his soldiers, with one acclaim, acknowledged him as their sovereign."

"This is mere trifling," said the lady; "the base-born offspring
Lancaster may dare aspire so high, but one act of ours dethrones him.
The Yorkists are numerous, and will defend their king: London is yet
ours."

"Yes," replied Lincoln, "it is in our power to deluge the streets of
London with blood, to bring massacre among its citizens, and worse
disaster on its wives and maidens. I would not buy an eternal crown for
myself--I will not strive to place that of England on my kinsman's
head--at this cost. We have had over-much of war: I have seen too many
of the noble, young, and gallant, fall by the sword. Brute force has had
its day; now let us try what policy can do."

The council these friends held together was long and anxious. The lady
still insisted on sudden and resolute measures. Lord Lovel, a soldier in
all his nature, looked forward to the calling together the Yorkists from
every part of the kingdom. The earl, with a statesman's experience, saw
more of obstacle to their purpose in the elevation of Henry the Seventh
than either of his companions would allow; the extreme youth of the duke
of York, the oblivion into which he had sunk, and the stain on his
birth, which was yet unremoved, would disincline the people to hazard
life and fortune in his cause. Henry had taken oath to marry his sister,
the Lady Elizabeth, and when thus the progeny of Edward the Fourth were
freed from the slur under which they now laboured, the whole country
would be alive to the claims of his only son. It was necessary now to
place him in safety, and far away from the suspicious eyes of his
usurping enemy. That morning Lord Lincoln had brought him up from his
rural retreat to the metropolis, and sheltered him for a few hours under
safe but strange guardianship. He was left at the house of a Flemish
money-lender well known at court. It was agreed that Lord Lovel should
take him thence, and make him the companion of his journey to
Colchester, where they should remain watching the turn of events, and
secretly preparing the insurrection which would place him on the throne.
Lady Brampton was obliged to proceed immediately northwards to join her
husband; the north was entirely Yorkist, and her influence would
materially assist the cause. The earl remained in London; he would sound
the inclinations of the nobility, and even coming in contact with the
new king, watch over danger and power at its fountain-head. One more
question was discussed: Whether the queen, Elizabeth Woodville, should
be made acquainted with the existence of her son. All three, from
various reasons, decided in the negative. A personal enmity existed
between the widow of Edward the Fourth and Lady Brampton: her party was
detested by the two nobles. It would be more popular with the nation,
they thought, if her kinsmen, whose upstart pretensions were the object
of the derision and scorn of the old aristocracy, had no part in
bestowing the crown on the heir of the House of York. Time wore away
during these deliberations; it was past midnight before the friends
separated. Lord Lovel presented his young friend, Edmund Plantagenet, to
the earl, and recommended him to his protection. Refreshment was also
necessary after Lovel's fatiguing journey; but he was so intent on
accomplishing his purpose, that he wasted but a few minutes in this
manner, and then being provided with a fresh horse from Lincoln's
stables, he left the palace to proceed first to the present abode of
Richard of York, and afterwards, accompanied by him, on his road to
Essex.

Lord Lovel threaded his way through the dark narrow streets of London
towards Lothbury. The habitation of the money-lender was well known to
him, but it was not easily entered at past midnight. A promised bribe to
the apprentice who hailed him from the lofty garret-window, and his
signet-ring sent in to his master, at length procured admission into the
bedchamber of Mynheer Jahn Warbeck. The old man sat up in his bed, his
red cotton night-cap on his head, his spectacles, with which he had
examined the ring, on his nose; his chamber was narrow and dilapidated,
his bed of ill condition. "Who would suppose," thought Lovel, "that this
man holds half England in pawn?"

When Warbeck heard that the errand of Lovel was to take from him his
princely charge, he rose hastily, wrapping a robe round him, and opened
a small wainscoat door leading into a little low room, whence he drew
the half-sleeping and wondering boy. There was a rush taper in the room,
and daylight began to peep through the crevices of the shutters, giving
melancholy distinctness to the dirty and dismantled chamber. One ray
fell directly on the red night-cap and spectacles of old Jahn, whose
parchment face was filled with wrinkles, yet they were lines of care,
not of evil, and there was even benevolence in his close mouth; for the
good humour and vivacity of the boy had won on him. Besides, he had
himself a son, for whom he destined all his wealth, of the same age as
the little fellow whose plump roseate hand he held in his own brown
shrivelled palm. The boy came in, rubbing his large blue eyes, the
disordered ringlets of his fair hair shading a face replete with
vivacity and intelligence. Mynheer Jahn was somewhat loth to part with
the little prince, but the latter clapped his hands in ecstasy when he
heard that Lord Lovel had come to take him away.

"I pray you tell me, Sir Knight," said old Warbeck, "whether
intelligence hath arrived of the victory of our gracious sovereign, and
the defeat of the Welsh rebels."

Richard became grave at these words; he fixed his, eyes inquiringly on
the noble: "Dear Lord Lovel," he cried, "for I remember you well, my
very good lord, when you came to the Tower and found me and Robert
Clifford playing at bowls--tell me, how you have fought, and whether
you have won."

"Mine are evil tidings," said Lord Lovel; "all is lost. We were
vanquished, and your royal uncle slain."

Warbeck's countenance changed at these words; he lamented the king; he
lamented the defeat of the party which he had aided by various advances
of money, and his regrets at once expressed sorrow for the death of
some, and dread from the confiscation of the property of others.
Meanwhile, Richard of York was full of some thought that swelled his
little breast; taking Lovel's hand, he asked again, "My uncle, Richard
the Third, is dead?"

"Even so," was the reply; "he died nobly on the field of battle."

The child drew himself up, and his eyes flashed as he said
proudly,--"Then I am king of England."

"Who taught your grace that lesson?" asked Lovel.

"My liege--my brother Edward. Often and often in the long winter
nights, and when he was sick in bed, he told me how, after he had been
proclaimed king, he had been dethroned; but that when our uncle died he
should be king again; and that if it pleased God to remove him, I should
stand in his place; and I should restore my mother's honour, and this he
made me swear."

"Bless the boy!" cried Warbeck, "he speaks most sagely; may the saints
incline my lord, the earl of Lincoln, to do his royal cousin justice!"

"Your grace," said Lovel, "shall hear more of this as we proceed on our
journey. Mynheer Jahn, the earl bade me apply to you; you are to repair
to him before noon; meanwhile, fill this long empty purse with gold
coins. He will be my guarantee."

"Lend me the money," cried the little duke, "I will repay you. We will
repay you, when we have our crown."

This was an inducement not to be resisted. Warbeck counted out the gold;
the boy with light steps tripped down the creaking old staircase, and
when Lovel had mounted, taking his hand, he sprung in the saddle before
him. The fresh morning air was grateful to both, after the close
chambers of the Fleming. The noble put his horse to a quick trot, and
leaving London by a different road from that by which he had entered,
took his way through Romford and Chelmsford to Colchester.

The news of the earl of Richmond's victory and assumption of the crown
reached London that night. The citizens heard it on their awakening. The
market people from the west related it to those who came in from the
east; but it had not hitherto travelled in that direction. Lovel knew
that the storm was behind him, but he outrode it; on the evening of the
second day he was safe in sanctuary at Colchester. His young charge was
lodged at a farm-house belonging to a tenant of Sir Humphrey Stafford.
They all awaited impatiently for the time when the earl of Lincoln would
put a period to their confinement, by informing them that the hour was
arrived when they might again take arms against the upstart Lancastrian
king.




CHAPTER III

ELIZABETH OF YORK


     Small joy have I have being England's queen.

                                              SHAKSPEARE.


Henry the Seventh was a man of strong sense and sound understanding. He
was prudent, resolute, and valiant; on the other hand, he was totally
devoid of generosity, and was actuated all his life by base and bad
passions. At first the ruling feeling of his heart was hatred of the
House of York--nor did he wholly give himself up to the avarice that
blotted his latter years, till the extinction of that unhappy family
satisfied his revenge, so that for want of fuel the flame died away.
Most of his relatives and friends had perished in the field or on the
scaffold by the hands of the Yorkists--his own existence had been in
jeopardy during their exaltation; and the continuance of his reign, and
even of his life, depended on their utter overthrow. Henry had a mind
commensurate to the execution of his plans: he had a talent for seizing,
as if instinctively, on all the bearings of a question before him; and a
ready perception of the means by which he might obviate difficulties and
multiply facilities, was the most prominent part of his character. He
never aimed at too much, and felt instantaneously when he had arrived at
the enough. More of cruelty would have roused England against him; less
would have given greater hopes to the partizans of his secreted rival.
He had that exact portion of callousness of heart which enabled him to
extricate himself in the admirable manner he did from all his
embarrassments.

It is impossible to say what his exact views were, when he landed in
England, an I made head against Richard the Third. His right of
succession, even through the House of Lancaster, was ill-founded, and
probably he would scarcely have dared to decorate his brows with the
royal circlet but for the happy boldness of Stanley, and the enthusiasm
felt by his soldiers in the hour of victory, which had bestowed it on
him. Once a king, as it was impossible, without risk of life, to sink to
a private station, he did not hesitate, but bent every energy of his
mind to the contriving the means to seat himself firmly on his
newly-acquired throne.

The illegitimacy of Edward the Fourth's children had removed them from
the succession. But though no doubt was entertained as to the fact of
Edward having married Lady Eleanor Butler, yet Henry had the taint of
illegitimacy on his own race; and, moreover, Elizabeth Woodville having
so long filled the station of queen of England, the public voice went in
her favour, and the majority of the English people looked upon the tale
which deprived her children of their rights, as a contrivance of their
usurping uncle. What then was to become of them? Edward the Fifth was
dead: of this fact there was no doubt. It had been rumoured that the
duke of York had not long survived his brother. To ascertain the truth
of this report, Henry dispatched one of his most staunch adherents to
the Tower. The boy was not there; but a mystery hung over his fate which
did not quite assure the new king of his death. Henry feared that he was
in the hands of the Yorkists, and this dread gave fresh vigour to his
distrust and abhorrence of the partizans of the White Rose. He formed a
scheme to defeat their projects; he caused it to be disseminated that
both the princes had been found dead--murdered--in the Tower.

The competitors for the crown, whose claims ranked next, were the
daughters of Edward the Fourth. Henry immediately saw the necessity of
agreeing to the treaty entered into by the countess of Richmond, for his
marriage with the eldest of these princesses. He hated to owe his title
to the crown to any part of the House of York; he resolved, if possible,
to delay and break the marriage; but his own friends were urgent with
him to comply, and prudence dictated the measure; he therefore promised
to adopt it--thus effectually to silence the murmurs of the party of
the White Rose.

But if the young duke of York reappeared meanwhile, it would be
necessary not to repeal the Act of Parliament that cast a stigma on his
birth. If the children of Elizabeth Woodville and Edward the Fourth were
debarred from the crown, the earl of Warwick was the next heir. He was
confined, by Richard the Third, at Sheriff Hutton, in Yorkshire. He was
the especial object of Henry's fear, and now he commanded him to be
brought from his northern prison to the Tower of London, to be kept a
close prisoner in that melancholy and ill-fated place. There was one
other rival, the earl of Lincoln, named by Richard to succeed him; but
his pretensions came so far behind the others, and he enjoyed so high a
reputation for sagacity and virtue, that Henry believed it best to let
him alone for the present, only surrounding him with spies; and
resolved, on the first note of danger, to destroy him.

Fortune smiled on the new sovereign. The disappearance of the two
children from the Tower caused the Yorkists to settle their affections
on the young Elizabeth. She was at Sheriff Hutton, waiting impatiently
for her union with her uncle; now she received commands to proceed to
London, as the affianced bride of that uncle's conqueror. Already the
common talk ran on the entwining of the two Roses; and all the adherents
of her family, who could gain access, recommended their cause to her,
and entreated her, in the first days of power, not to forget her
father's friends, but to incline the heart of her husband to an
impartial love for the long rival houses of Lancaster and York.

Two parties arrived on the same day at Sheriff Hutton, on the different
missions of conducting the Lady Elizabeth and the earl of Warwick to
London. On the morning of their departure they met in the garden of
their abode to take leave of each other. Elizabeth was nineteen years
old, Warwick was the exact age of her brother, Edward the Fifth; he was
now sixteen.

"We are about to travel the same road with far different expectations,"
said Warwick. "I go to be a prisoner; you, fair cousin, to ascend a
throne."

There was a despondency in the youth's manner that deeply affected this
princess. "Dear Edward," she replied, clasping his hand; "we have been
fellow-prisoners long, and sympathy has lightened the burthen of our
chains. Can I forget our walks in this beauteous park, and the love and
confidence we have felt for each other? My dearest boy, when I am queen,
Esther will claim a boon from Ahasuerus, and Warwick shall be the chief
noble in my train."

She looked at him with a brilliant smile; her heart glowed with sisterly
affection. She might well entertain high anticipations of future power;
she was in the pride of youth and beauty; the light spirit of expected
triumph lighted up her lovely face. She was about to become the bride of
a conqueror, yet one whose laurels would droop without her propping; she
was to be queen of her native land, the pearly clasp to unite the silken
bond with which peace now bound long discordant England. She was unable
to communicate this spirit of hope to her desponding friend; he gazed on
her beauty with admiration and deep grief, asking, with tearful eyes,
"Shall we ever meet again?"

"Yes! in London, in the court of Henry, we shall again be
companions--friends."

"I go to the Tower, not to the court," replied Warwick, "and when those
gloomy gates close on me, I shall pray that my head may soon repose on
the cold stone that pillows my cousin Edward. I shall sleep uneasily
till then."

"Fie, cousin!" said Elizabeth; "such thoughts ill beseem the nearest
kinsman of the future queen of England. You will remain but a short time
in the Tower; but if you nurse thoughts like these, you will pine there
as you did before I shared your prison here, and the roses with which my
care has painted your cheeks, will again fade."

"Wan and colourless will my cheek be ere your bright eyes look on it
again. Is it not sufficient grief that I part from you, beloved friend!"

A gush at once of sorrow, of affection, of long suppressed love,
overpowered the youth. "I shall think of you," he added, "in my
prison-house; and while I know that you regret my fate, I cannot be
wholly a wretch. Do you not love me? And will you not, as a proof, give
me one of these golden hairs, to soothe poor Warwick's misery? One
only," he said, taking from braided locks the small gift he demanded, "I
will not diminish the rich beauty of your tresses, yet they will not
look lovelier, pressed by the jewelled diadem of England, than under the
green chaplet I crowned you with a few months past, my Queen of May!"

And thus, the eyes of each glistening with tears, they parted. For a
moment Warwick looked as if he wished to press his cousin to his heart;
and she, who loved him as a sister, would have yielded to his embrace:
but before his arms enfolded her, he started back, bent one knee,
pressed her hand to his lips, his eyes, his brow, and bending his head
for an instant towards the ground, sprang up, and rushed down the avenue
towards the gate at which his guard awaited him. Elizabeth stood
motionless, watching him till out of sight. The sun sparkled brightly on
a tuft of wild flowers at her feet. The glittering light caught her eye.
"It is noon," she thought; "the morning dew is dry; it is Warwick's
tears that gem these leaves." She gathered the flowers, and, first
kissing them, placed them in her bosom; with slow steps, and a sorrowing
heart, she re-entered the castle.

The progress of the Lady Elizabeth from Sheriff Hutton to London was
attended by every circumstance that could sustain her hopes. She was
received with acclamation and enthusiasm in every town through which she
passed. She indeed looked forward with girlish vanity to the prospect of
sharing the throne with Henry. She had long been taught the royal
lesson, that with princes, the inclinations are not to bear any part in
a disposal of the hand. Her imagination fed on the good she would do for
others, when raised to the regal dignity; the hope of liberating
Warwick, and of fulfilling her mother's wishes in conferring benefits on
various partizans of the White Rose, filled her bosom with the purest
joy; youth, beauty, and the expectation of happiness, caused the measure
of her content to overflow. With a fluttering heart she entered London:
small preparation had been made to receive her, and she was immediately
conducted to her mother's abode at the Tower Royal, in the parish of
Walbrook. The first check her hopes received arose from the clouded brow
of the queen, as she embraced her daughter, and welcomed her arrival.
Many fears in truth occupied the thoughts of the illustrious widow. She
could not forget her sons; and the mystery that hung over the fate of
the younger pressed heavily upon her. It was now the eighteenth of
October, and the preparations for the coronation of Henry were in great
forwardness; Parliament had recognized his title without any allusion to
the union with the heiress of the House of York. She had endeavoured to
fathom his purposes, and to understand his character. She knew that he
entertained a settled hatred for the White Rose, and that his chief
pride lay in establishing himself on the throne, independent of the
claim he might acquire by his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth. The
common people murmured, the Yorkists were discontented,--the neighbour
stage before they should break out into open rebellion. Thus dark clouds
interposed before the sun of peace, which had been said to have risen on
the event of the battle of Bosworth Field.

Henry the Seventh was crowned on the thirtieth of October. The queen
looked on this ceremony as the downfall of her hopes. Housed by this
fear, she entered into a sea of intrigue, in which, after all, she had
no certain aim, except that of re-animating the zeal of the Yorkists,
and of exciting such discontent in the public mind, on the postponement
of her daughter's marriage, as to force Henry to consent to an immediate
union. The gentle Elizabeth had meanwhile submitted patiently to her
destiny. She dismissed regality from her thoughts, and devoted herself
to her mother; recreating herself in the society of her sisters, and now
and then contemplating the faded leaves she had brought from Sheriff
Hutton, and lamenting the fate of Warwick. She had learned to fear and
almost to hate Henry; and, but for the sake of her suffering party, to
rejoice that he had apparently relinquished his intention of marrying
her.

The dissatisfaction manifested by the English people forced Henry to
comply with the universal wish entertained of seeing the daughter of
Edward the Fourth on the throne; yet it was not until the beginning of
January that the princess received intimation to prepare for her
nuptials. This prospect, which had before elated, now visited her
coldly; for, without the hope of influencing her husband, the state of a
queen appeared mere bondage. In her heart she wished to reject her
uncourteous bridegroom; and once she had ventured to express this desire
to her mother, who, filled with affright, laid aside her intrigues,
devoting herself to cultivate a more rational disposition in her
daughter. Henry paid the doomed girl one visit, and saw little in her
except a bashful child; while his keener observation was directed
towards the dowager queen. She, with smooth brow and winning smiles, did
the honours of reception to her future son-in-law--to her bitter foe.
The cold courtesy of Henry chilled her; and a strong desire lurked under
her glossy mien, to reproach the usurper with his weak title, to set up
her daughter's claim in opposition to his, and to defy him to the field.
As soon as Henry departed, her suppressed emotions found vent in tears.
Elizabeth was astonished: she knelt before her, caressed her, and asked
if all were not well now, since the plighted troth had passed between
her and the king.

"Has it passed?" murmured the queen; "and is your hapless fate decided?
Why did I not join you at Sheriff Hutton? Why did I not place your hand
in that of your noble cousin? Ah, Warwick! could I even now inspire you
with my energy, you would be free in arms; and England to a man would
rise in the cause of Edward the Sixth, and my sweet Elizabeth!"

The colour in the princess's cheeks varied during the utterance of this
speech; first they flushed deep red, but the pale hue of resolution
succeeded quickly to the agitation of doubt. "Mother," she said, "I was
your child; plastic clay in your hands; had you said these words two
hours ago, Warwick might have been liberated--I perhaps happy. But you
have given me away; this ring is the symbol of my servitude; I belong to
Henry. Say no word, I beseech you, that can interfere with my duty to
him. Permit me to retire."

On the eighteenth of January her nuptials were celebrated.

The forbidding manners of Henry threw a chill over the marriage
festival. He considered that he had been driven to this step by his
enemies; and that the chief among these, influenced by her mother, was
Elizabeth herself. The poor girl never raised her eyes from the moment
she had encountered at the altar the stern and unkind glance of the
king. Her steps were unassured, her voice faltering; the name of wife
was to her synonymous with that of slave, while her sense of duty
prevented every outward demonstration of the despair that occupied her
heart.

Her mother's indignation was deeper, although not less veiled. She could
silence, but not quell, the rage that arose in her breast from her
disappointment; and there were many present who shared her sentiments.
As far as he had been able, Henry had visited the Yorkists with the
heaviest penalties. An act of attainder had been passed against the duke
of Norfolk, Lord Lovel, the Staffords, and all indeed of note who had
appeared against him. Those with whom he could not proceed to
extremities, he wholly discountenanced. The Red Rose flourished bright
and free--one single white blossom, doomed to untimely blight, being
entwined with the gaudier flowers.




CHAPTER IV

LADY BRAMPTON


     My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
     And henceforth I am thy true servitor.

                                           SHAKSPEARE.


Meanwhile the Yorkists were impatient for action. The existence of
Prince Richard was a secret to all save Lincoln and Lovel--even the
Staffords were kept in ignorance; their purpose, therefore, was merely
to put down the Lancastrians, and to raise their own party, with Warwick
or Lincoln at their head; they cared not which, so that they got a king
who would, in his turn, uproot the Red Rose. Lincoln would consent to no
decisive step; but from the day of his cousin's marriage, all his
emissaries and friends were on foot to cause insurrectionary movements
in the kingdom, rousing in the old Yorkists their ancient party spirit,
and inspiring the young with hopes of future aggrandizement and victory.

As the spring advanced, Henry sent the young queen, with her mother and
sisters, and the countess of Richmond, to hold her court at Winchester,
while he resolved on a progress through the northern counties of
England, the most affected towards the House of York, to endeavour, by
the royal presence, to awaken affection towards the reigning sovereign.
He passed the festival of Easter at Lincoln, and there he heard that
Lord Lovel and the two Staffords had escaped from sanctuary. The sound
of insurrection is fearful to a newly-anointed king; but as no
explanation was given to their movements, and no name of import mingled
in the tale, he felt less perturbation at this intelligence. As he
proceeded on his journey, the affair took a more serious aspect. The
Staffords advanced to besiege Worcester; and Lovel, with an increasing
army of three or four thousand men, was in the neighbourhood of York.

Sir Edward Brampton joined the forces of Lord Lovel, and he and Lady
Brampton again met. The history of this lady was singular. Ten years
before the time of which we write, being then eighteen, she married, and
attended the court of Edward the Fourth. She had talent and vivacity;
her dark laughing eyes, the animation of her countenance, her gay and
_naïve_ manners, attracted her sovereign; and she was soon distinguished
as one whose advancement, if so it might be called, to the highest
influence over him, depended on her own choice between honour and such
preferment. She did not hesitate; but her rejection won Edward as much
as her beauty. A kind of friendship, kept up under the chivalrous
phraseology of the day, was established between them, that gave,
perhaps, more umbrage to the queen than a less avowed connection would
have done. All was open; and if the good humour of her young rival never
permitted her to assume haughtiness, there was something even more
revolting in her girlish assumptions of power and consequence. The queen
hated and affected to despise Lady Brampton; Lady Brampton felt that she
injured the wife of Edward the Fourth. At first she had earnestly sought
to gain her favour, but when rebuffed, she resorted to the weapons of
youth, beauty, and wit, and set at defiance the darkened brow of
Elizabeth. Ten years had passed since then.

Edward the Fourth died, and under Richard the Third Lady Brampton
returned to her natural place in society; nay, the vivacity of speech
with which she defended the rights of his nephews, made him absolutely
discountenance her. In her days of pride she had refused every mark of
favour from Edward, thus to place their avowed friendship far above the
petty intrigues of the courtiers. It might have been thought that the
queen and her rival would now, on the grounds of affection for Edward's
children, have leagued together; but, on the contrary, the mother
expressed contempt and indignation at the presumption of Lady Brampton
in assuming a personal interest in her children, and that lady too well
remembered how often her manner and speech must have offended the queen
to make any vain attempt at reconciliation. The earl of Lincoln and Lady
Brampton had always been friends; her liveliness amused him, her
integrity and real goodness of heart won his esteem. Her passionate love
for the princes in the Tower had caused him, when he withdrew thence the
young Richard, whose ill-health demanded constant feminine attentions,
to confide him to her charge; thus she alone became possessed of the
secret of his existence, and now with Lord Lovel she debated how best
his interests could be furthered.

Lord Lincoln feared by rash measures to endanger the safety of his
nephew. He desired to place him on the throne, but he preferred bringing
him up in freedom and obscurity to any ill-judged attempt that might
throw him into his enemy's hands, and make him prisoner for life. His
plans were all laid upon this principle; he commanded Lord Lovel, who
submitted wholly to him, not to breathe the name of the son of Edward
till he had gained a decided advantage over the reigning sovereign. If
victorious, he might set up the royal standard and proclaim Richard the
Fourth, while the earl, still in London, would call together all the
Yorkists, and, in the absence of the king, seize, in his nephew's name,
upon the capital of the kingdom. If Lord Lovel's attempt proved
unsuccessful, it was decided that the prince should escape immediately
to the Continent, there to remain till some new insurrection was
organized; for, though cautious, he was resolute, and he had determined
never to relinquish his purpose, but to excite rebellion and discontent
against Henry till the rightful heir possessed his own.

These plans were in contradiction to Lady Brampton's views, but she was
obliged to submit. Her quick woman's wit discovered her another danger.
The absolute silence observed concerning the young prince, then only
eleven years of age, might in the end cast a doubt over the justice of
his pretensions, and she told Lord Lovel, that if, after a failure,
Richard quitted England, he must first be seen and acknowledged by his
mother. She resolved, therefore, on immediately going to Winchester to
prepare Elizabeth for the reception of her son; and Lord Lovel, who
agreed in the wisdom of this proposal, promised, at all hazards, that
ere leaving the kingdom the duke of York should cross the country to
that town, whence, by Southampton, he might escape to France. While,
therefore. Lord Lovel increased his army, and marched in high hopes
towards York, Lady Brampton proceeded southward, meditating the safest
and best manner of introducing herself to the queen.

There was a man, Richard Simon, or Symond, who afterwards figured in the
chronicles, that had long been secretly concerned in the course of
events. He was the son of a tenant of Sir John Gray, and had been the
playmate of the Lady Elizabeth Gray's elder children. His love of books,
his sedentary habits, and quick wit on matters of learning, led those
interested in his fate to consider him fitted for the church, and
therefore, he took priest's orders. But his mind, though not attuned to
action in its noblest sense, was not one that could remain at rest. He
loved power; he was sagacious, astute, and intriguing: when the Lady
Gray became queen, he being still too young for high promotion,
preferred an unnoticed but influential situation near her person to more
lucrative employ, which would remove him from the pleasures and dignity
of the court. When Edward died, he devoted himself to the service of his
royal patroness, and hardly escaped being imprisoned for life by
Richard, when the latter was most exasperated against the
queen dowager's relations. From that time Richard Simon found full
occupation for his plotting head, in endeavouring to bring about the
overthrow of the usurping Gloucester, and to raise the hopes of Henry
the Seventh, who requited ill his active zeal: and now again he busied
himself in exalting the queen's party. He looked the man he was--a
prier into secrets--one who conducted the drama of life by back-stairs
and tell-tale valets: his small grey eyes were quick to discern the
meaning of each smile or frown; his young brow was already wrinkled
through care and thought; craft lurked in the corners of his lips; and
his whispering voice betokened habitual caution. He continued to hover
near the queen; now despatched to sound some Yorkist, now closeted to
discuss some expression of the king's, in which to find a secret
meaning. Repose was the thing he hated: and for ever with some plan on
foot, some web to weave or unravel, he was seen with brows a little
elevated by self-conceit, with a courtly bend of the body, and
insinuating address, now assuring a Lancastrian of the perfect
satisfaction of the queen, now whispering to a Yorkist a tale of slights
and injuries practised by King Henry against his consort and her
friends. All the communication that had taken place between Elizabeth
Woodville and the earl of Lincoln had been carried on through this man,
though each knew not that he communicated to the other what either said.
But Lincoln respected his undeviating fidelity towards his patroness,
and valued his talents. It was to this man that Lady Brampton addressed
herself on her arrival at Winchester, to procure for her a private
audience with the queen. Her dark hints respecting the insurrection of
Lovel and the Staffords excited his curiosity, yet he experienced more
difficulty than he expected in bringing the royal dowager to consent to
receive her rival. When our days of prosperity are fled we cling fondly
to all that reminds us of their brightness, and turn with augmented
distaste from every thing that marred their splendour. Elizabeth loved to
remember herself as the chosen bride of Edward, and any circumstance
that spoke of his inconstancy, or detracted from the entireness of her
influence over him, then inspired her with indignation, now with
abhorrence. It required all Simon's dexterity to allay her anger, and
excite her curiosity, sufficiently to induce her to admit her rival to
her presence.

It was at the hour of vespers that the priest introduced Lady Brampton
into the queen's cabinet. Elizabeth was assured that she had secrets of
importance to communicate, and she designed by affability to win her to
a full disclosure of them. Yet her heart and manner grew cold as she
entered the closet where the lady and her guide already were, and
bending her head slightly, she said, "The Lady Brampton desired an
audience with me--I grant it."

With all her vivacity and consciousness of the importance of her
disclosures, the lady felt herself awed and chilled; and the memory of
Edward came across her, who had before shielded her from such
unkindness, and filled her eyes with tears. A long pause ensued; the
queen looked as in expectation, and Richard Simon, who had retired to an
embrasure of a window, was about to come forward, when Lady Brampton,
conquering her emotion, said, "Your grace is the happy mother of the
queen of England, and the hope of an heir, which you now entertain, may
make my intelligence distasteful."

"Say on," replied Elizabeth, haughtily; "I listen to your words."

The lady felt much inclined not to say another word, but assuming almost
equal coldness of manner, she continued, "Would your grace prefer that
your fair daughter should still bear the sceptre, or that Richard the
Fourth should wrest it from the husband's grasp?"

Now indeed the queen started, and cried impetuously, "I charge you,
trifle with me no longer! Explain your words; who would supplant my
child?"

"Her brother," Lady Brampton replied; and seeing the queen lost in a
mixture of amazement and terror, she added, "The Duke of York still
lives: he is now, I trust, at the head of forces sufficient to enforce
his rights. In a few days England will acknowledge him as sovereign."

In reply to these words, spoken with rapidity, as if they were pregnant
with supreme delight to their auditress, the queen with an angry look,
said, "I shall league with no plotters to establish an impostor."

"Beware," said Lady Brampton, indignantly; "let your majesty bethink
yourself before you consign your son to misery and an early grave. Will
his mother be his chief enemy?"

"Who vouches for him?"

"Himself! He is the very Edward who once was yours: his young features
are but the miniature mirror of his royal father; his princely grace,
his wit, his courage, are all derived from him."

"I must see the boy," said the queen, "to end at once this silly masque.
How do you pretend that he escaped form the Tower?"

The independence and sensibility of Lady Brampton's disposition would
not permit her to answer a question asked thus ironically. Had she
looked at the queen, she might have seen, by her change of countenance,
that it was nearly all put on by the jealous instinct that would not
permit her to acknowledge herself under so great an obligation to her
rival. Lady Brampton turned to Simon, saying, "I am ready to depart, Sir
Priest; I see her grace sorrows that the same cold bed does not entomb
Richard of York and Edward the Fifth. Poor prince! My Lord of Lincoln
counselled well, and I was to blame in not acting on his advice."

"Stay," cried Elizabeth, "speak again. Is the earl of Lincoln a party to
this tale?"

"Your majesty insults me," said the lady; "I came here to please a
mother's ear by assurances of her son's safety, and to conduct the
tempest-tost fortunes of this ill-starred boy into the safe harbour of
maternal love. I came with a full heart and an ardent desire to serve
you; no other motive could have led me hither. You receive me with
disdain; you dismiss me with contumely. I fear that so much you hate me,
that, for my sake, your heart is steeled against your princely son. But
as you already know so much as to make it necessary that you should know
all, I will hasten to London, and intreat the noble De la Poole to
communicate with you, and to avert a mother's enmity from her child. I
take my leave."

She was about to depart; but Simon, who knew that a feud between the
prince's partizans must ruin his cause, entreated her to remain; and
then addressing the queen, tried to soothe her, for she was pacing the
rushes of her chamber in excessive agitation. "Peace, good friend," said
she, "I will speak to Lincoln; I will ask him why I, who was deemed by
his honoured uncle fit partaker of his councils, am kept by him in
ignorance of the alleged existence of this poor boy? Even now he might
be sitting on the throne, had I been consulted: instead of this, to what
has this distrust brought him? He is a crownless king, a fugitive
prince, branded as an impostor; a seal is put on his fate, which nothing
probably will ever remove. I, even I, have called my son, if such he be,
a counterfeit!"

Maternal tenderness touched to the quick the royal lady's heart, and she
wept. Lady Brampton was all impulse and goodness of disposition: she
felt that Elizabeth had wronged her, but in a moment she forgave the
offence; she advanced, and kneeling at her feet, touched her hand
gently, as she said, "Let not your grace judge too harshly of our
proceedings. We poor faulty human beings, hurried hither and thither by
passion, are for ever jostling against and hurting each other, where
more perfect natures would coalesce, and thus succeed where we fail.
Forgive, forget the past; it cannot now be changed. Forgive the earl,
who, long bound by an oath to his uncle Gloucester, could only save your
son's life by feigning his death. Forgive the humblest of your servants,
even myself, who acted under his commands, and who now, in disobedience
to them, attempts to bring the royal exile to his mother's arms. Would
that my humility could appease your displeasure, and that you would
acknowledge me your faithful follower. My life should be at the disposal
of you and the princely York."

Lady Brampton, full of vivacity, energy, and even of imperiousness, had
so much grace in her manner and sweetness in her voice, when she laid
these keen weapons aside to assume those of gentleness and love, that
she was irresistible. The queen, at once softened, stretched out her
hand, which the lady pressed respectfully to her lips; then, as friends
bent on one design, they conversed unreservedly together. Lady Brampton
entered into long details concerning the past history of the duke of
York, and the schemes then on foot for his advancement. This was not
their sole interview; they met again and again, and mutual affection
confirming the link which the fate of Richard caused to exist between
them, the queen named the Lady Brampton one of her ladies, and
henceforth they lived together under the same roof.




CHAPTER V

THE INTERVIEW



     England, farewell! thou, who hast been my cradle,
     Shalt never be my dungeon or my grave.

                                       SHELLEY.


The historical account of Lord Lovel's insurrection is contained in a
few words. While the two Staffords besieged Worcester, this nobleman
advanced against Henry in York. The duke of Bedford was sent against
him, who published a general pardon, for all the rebels who should
submit. The soldiers of Lord Lovel had no powerful watch-word to insure
their union; the existence of Edward the Fourth's son was a profound
secret; they were therefore easily induced to abandon an almost nameless
cause; and in three weeks Lord Lovel found himself with only one hundred
adherents, or rather personal friends, who at his earnest entreaty
disbanded, while he, chiefly bent on saving the life of his princely
charge, felt greater security in being left singly with him.

He had promised to traverse England, and to conduct him to Winchester;
but the hot pursuit on foot forced him to delay this journey. Meanwhile
a present refuge was to be sought. He had a stanch friend in a zealous
Yorkist, Sir Thomas Broughton, who resided in Lancashire, to whose
residence he directed his steps. Still, even during this short journey,
great precaution was necessary. Lord Lovel and his charge travelled
disguised, avoiding highroads and great towns. On the second evening,
when the red aspect of the setting sun threatened an inclement night,
they took shelter in a lone cot, on one of the wild moors of that
county.

A long habit of personal attendance had instilled into Lovel's mind a
parental affection for the little prince. They had journeyed far that
day, and Richard was overpowered by fatigue; his friend strewed for him
a bed of leaves--he stretched himself on it, and quickly fell into a
sound sleep, while the noble kept up the fire he had lighted, and paced
the hut, revolving in his mind a thousand schemes. It was a chill
February evening; and, as night came on, a thick sleet beat against the
windows, while the wind, sweeping over the wide health, howled round the
miserable shepherd's cot. Some time passed thus, and fear in Lovel's
mind gave place to the sense of security, inspired by the desolation of
the spot and the inclemency of the elements. He needed rest, and as soon
as he had thrown himself on the ground, drowsiness overpowered him--the
wind sang a wild lullaby to both the sleepers.

Though still lost to the outer world, a change passed over Lovel's
countenance--again his features relaxed into sleep, and again expressed
disquietude. The tramp of horses' feet was around the hut--voices
mingled alien sounds with the raging blast;--at last a loud knocking at
the door caused the noble at once to start on his feet wide awake.
Richard still slept on. Lord Lovel cautiously withdrew into the shadow
behind the door, listening intently to divine the motives of these
unwelcome intruders. He felt assured that they were emissaries of Henry,
who had traced him hither; he endeavoured to form in his mind some plan
of conduct to save the duke, whom he was about to awaken and put on his
guard, when a woman's voice struck upon his ear. The knocking at the
door was changed into a violent beating, the rude hinges gave way, and
it swung back. The fugitive's heart beat quick; it was a moment full of
fate; such a one as, when passed, we seem to have concentrated a life
into its small space. The man that entered calmed his fears; low in
stature, broadly built, a cloak lined with furs added to his bulk, and a
Flemish hat completed his peaceable appearance; though he was too much
muffled to show his face. Glancing at Lovel a look which was, doubtless,
intended to convey reproach, he muttered some words in a foreign
guttural language, and went back to his companions. Two women now
entered, both enveloped in furs. One stepped lightly on, and drew the
bench, which had lately pillowed the head of Lovel, closer to the fire,
while the other, bending under the burthen in her arms, approached
slower, and sitting down on the seat prepared for her, threw back her
cloak, and discovered that she bore in her arms a sleeping child, about
six years of age. The first, meanwhile, disencumbered herself of her
rich furs, and then leaning over the child, kissed its little hands, and
regarded its sleeping form with mingled anxiety and tenderness, speaking
to the other in a foreign dialect, evidently about the risk the poor
babe had run from exposure to the weather. Lovel remained a mute
spectator; he resolved not to come forward till he should see who their
male attendants were. After a brief interval the first intruder again
entered; he threw off his cloak, and looking round with keen eyes, the
fugitive discovered the well-known features of a friend. His heart now
relieved, his countenance lighted up, and he stepped forward, saying:
"Mynheer Jahn Warbeck, God be with you! you travel on a stormy night."

"And you, Lord Lovel," replied the money-lender, angrily, "are
sufficiently discourteous to wanderers at suck a season. Why even vipers
are harmless during a storm."

"But fair weather returns, and they again find their sting. I might bare
my own breast, but--" he pointed to the bed of leaves, on which, in
spite of the tumult, young Richard still slept.

Warbeck started: but before he could reply, one of his companions turned
to speak to him, and a conversation ensued, begun in Dutch, and
continued in French, concerning the circumstances which had divided them
from their attendants, and their fatiguing wanderings during the storm.
A small saddlebag was produced by Warbeck, containing a few provisions.
A bed for the sleeping child was formed, and the travellers sat round
the fire, enjoying their simple fare. From time to time the fair blue
eyes of the younger lady, who was evidently the mistress, and the other
an attendant, turned to look on the chivalric form and manly beauty of
Lovel; a few smiling observations escaped her in her native language,
which Warbeck answered drily and succinctly. The bench on which the lady
sat was soon sacrificed for firing--the cloaks of the party were dried,
and the women, wrapt in them, sought repose on the bare ground, which
was the sole flooring of the hut, the younger drawing to her bosom the
sleeping child. Lovel and Warbeck kept silence, till the deep breathing
of their companions showed that they slept: then, in reply to the
Fleming's questions, Lovel related the history of the last months, and
at the conclusion frankly asked his advice and assistance in
accomplishing his design of conveying the duke of York to Winchester.
Warbeck looked thoughtful on this demand, and after a pause said, "I
cannot say wherefore this unfortunate prince excites so strong an
interest in me; for in truth my heart yearns towards him as if he were
akin to me. Is it because he bore for a time my poor boy's name?"

Warbeck paused; his hard features were strongly marked by grief--"I and
my sister," he continued, "crossed the country to visit my Peterkin, who
was ill--who is lost to me now for ever."

A pause again ensued: the young soldier respected too much the father's
grief to interrupt it. At length the Fleming said, "Lord Lovel, I
will--I trust I can--save Duke Richard's life. My sister is
kind-hearted; and the silence you have observed concerning the very
existence of King Edward's son makes the task more easy. Madeline is
about to return to her own country; she was to have taken my Peterkin
with her. Let the prince again assume that name: it shall be my care to
escort him in this character to Winchester; and at Portsmouth they may
embark, while you follow your own plans, and take refuge with the
friends you mention in these parts."

As Warbeck spoke, Lovel motioned to him to observe his sister, who,
unable to sleep, was observing them with attention. "Madeline does not
understand our English," said her brother; "but it were well that she
joined our counsels, which may continue in French. I have your leave, my
lord, to disclose your secret to her? Fear her not: she would die rather
than injure one hair of that poor child's head."

On Warbeck's invitation, the lady rose; and he, taking her hand, led her
to the low couch of the duke of York. Sleep and gentle dreams spread an
irradiation of beauty over him: his glowing cheek, his eyes hardly
closed, the masses of rich auburn hair that clustered on a brow of
infantine smoothness and candour, the little hand and arm, which, thrown
above his head, gave an air of helplessness to his attitude, combined to
form a picture of childish grace and sweetness, which no woman, and that
woman a mother, could look on without emotions of tenderness. "What an
angelic child," said the fair sister of Warbeck, as she stooped to kiss
his rosy cheek; "what a noble-looking boy. Who is he?"

"One proscribed," said the cavalier; "one whom he who reigns over
England would consign to a dungeon. Were he to fall into the hands of
his enemies, they might not, indeed, dare not cut him off violently; but
they would consume and crush him, by denying him all that contributes to
health and life."

"Can this sweet boy have enemies?" cried the lady: "Ah! if he have, has
he not friends also to guard him from them?"

"With our lives!" he replied, emphatically; "but that is a small
sacrifice and a useless one; for, to preserve him we must preserve
ourselves. My life,--such acts deserve no record,--I have, and will
again and again expose for him; but the will to save him is not enough
without the power; and that power you possess, lady, to a far, far
greater extent than I."

"The will I have most certainly," said the fair one, regarding the boy
with anxious tenderness. "Command me, sire chevalier; my power, small as
I must believe it to be, and my will, shall unite to preserve this sweet
child."

Warbeck disclosed briefly to his sister the secret of young Richard's
birth, and detailed his plan for his safe journey to Winchester; nay,
and after that, for his crossing the sea, and continuing to personate,
in Flanders, the nephew of Madeline, if so his royal mother deemed
fitting, till the moment should arrive, when the schemes of his
partizans being crowned with success, he could be restored to his
country and his birthright. The fair Fleming joyfully assented to this
proposition, and entered cordially into the details. Lovel was profuse
of thanks: so suddenly and so easily to be relieved from his worst
fears, appeared like the special interposition of some guardian saint.
His heart overflowed with gratitude; and his glistening eyes gave token
of greater thanks than even his emphatic words. Madeline felt all the
excitement of being actively employed in a deed of benevolence: her calm
features were animated with an angelic expression. The discussion of
details demanding the coolest prudence and most vigilant observation,
long occupied them: and the lady brought a woman's tact and keen
penetration to arrange the crude designs of her brother. All was
rendered smooth; every obstacle foreseen and obviated; every pass of
danger reconnoitered and provided for. When, at last, their plans were
perfected, the lady again returned to her hard couch to seek repose: for
some time the cavalier and the Fleming kept watch, till they also, in
such comfortless posture as they might, stretched on the bare ground,
yielded to drowsiness; and grey morning found all the dwellers in the
sheep-cot sunk in profound sleep. Fear, charity, hope, and love, might
colour their dreams; but quiet slumber possessed them all, driving care
and thought from the heart and brain, to steep both in oblivion of all
ill.

When Madeline awoke in the morning, the first sight that met her eyes
was the lovely boy she had promised to protect, playing with her
dark-eyed girl, who displayed all the ecstasy of childish glee with her
new playmate. Madeline was a blonde Fleming, with light blue eyes and
flaxen ringlets--she was about five-and-twenty years of age; an
expression of angelic goodness animated her features, bestowing on them
an appearance of loveliness, which of themselves they did not possess.
It could hardly be guessed, that Richard's playmate was the daughter of
the fair-haired Fleming: but the husband of Warbeck's sister was a
Spaniard, and the child resembled her father in everything except the
soft mouth and sweet smile, which was all her mother's: her large full
dark eyes gave to her infantine face a look of sensibility far beyond
her years. The little girl ran to her mother when she awoke; and
Madeline caressed both her and the prince with the greatest tenderness.
They stood at the door of the cottage; the early sun shone brightly on
the hoar frost that covered the moor; the keen air was bracing, though
cold; the morning was cheerful, such as inspires hope and animation, a
lively wit to understand, and a roused courage to meet difficulties.

Madeline turned from the glittering scene to look on her young
charge--his eyes were fixed on her face. "How beautiful and good you
look," said the boy.

"I am glad that you think me good," replied the lady, smiling; "you will
have less fear in trusting yourself with me: your noble friend has
confided your grace to my care, if, indeed, you will condescend to live
with me, and be as a son to me. I have just lost a little nephew whom I
fondly loved; will you supply his place, and take his name?"

"Fair cousin," said the prince, caressing his kind friend as he spoke,
"I will wait on you, and serve you as no nephew ever served. What name
did your lost kinsman bear? Quickly tell me, that I may know my own, and
hereafter call myself by it."

"Perkin Warbeck," said Madeline.

"Now you mock me," cried Richard: "that has long been my name; but I
knew not that it gave me a claim to so pretty a relation."

"This courtly language," replied the lady, "betrays your grace's
princeliness. What will our Flemish boors say, when I present the
nursling of royalty as mine? You will shame our homely breeding, Duke
Richard."

"I beseech you, fair mistress," said Lovel, who now joined them, "to
forget, even in private, such high-sounding titles. It is dangerous to
play at majesty, unaided by ten thousand armed asserters of our right.
Remember this noble child only as your loving nephew, Perkin Warbeck:
he, who well knows the misery of regal claims unallied to regal
authority, will shelter himself gladly and gratefully under the shadow
of your lowly bower."

And now, as the wintry sun rose higher, the travellers prepared for
their departure. Warbeck first left them to find and to dismiss his
domestics, who would have been aware of the deception practised in the
person of Richard. He returned in a few hours for his sister. The duke
and Lord Lovel then separated. The intervening time had been employed by
the noble in schooling the boy as to his future behaviour, in recounting
to him his plans and hopes, and in instructing him how to conduct
himself with his mother, if indeed he saw her; for Lovel was ignorant
how Lady Brampton had succeeded at Winchester, and how far it would be
possible to bring about an interview between the queen and her son. At
length Warbeck returned; the travellers mounted, and Lord Lovel,
watching from the cottage door, beheld with melancholy regret the prince
depart: the long habit of intercourse, the uncertain future, his high
pretensions, and his present state, had filled the cavalier with moody
thoughts, unlike his usual sanguine anticipations, and energetic
resolves. "This is womanly," at last he thought, as the reflection that
he was alone, and had, perhaps, seen his beloved charge for the last
time, filled his eyes with unwonted tears. "To horse! To my
friends!--There to plan, scheme, devise--and then again to the field!"

Days and weeks passed, replete with doubt and anxiety to the queen and
her enthusiastic friend at Winchester. Each day, many, many times, Lady
Brampton visited the cathedral to observe whether the silver heart was
suspended near the altar, which she had agreed with Lord Lovel should be
the sign of the duke's arrival. The part Elizabeth Woodville had to play
meanwhile was difficult and painful--she lived in constant intercourse
with the countess of Richmond; the wishes and thoughts of all around
were occupied by the hope of an heir to the crown, which the young queen
would soon bestow on England. The birth of a son, it was prognosticated,
would win her husband's affection, and all idea of future disturbance,
of further risings and disloyalty, through the existence of this joint
offspring of the two Roses, would be for ever at an end. While these
hopes and expectations formed, it was supposed, the most flattering and
agreeable subject of congratulation for the dowager queen, she remained
sleepless and watchful, under the anticipation of seeing her fugitive
son, the outcast and discrowned claimant of all that was to become the
birthright of the unborn child.

At length the unwearied cares of Lady Brampton were rewarded; a small
silver heart, bearing the initials of Richard, duke of York, was
suspended near the shrine; and as she turned to look who placed it
there, the soft voice of Madeline uttered the word of recognition agreed
upon; joy filled Lady Brampton's heart, as the brief answers to her
hurried questions assured her of Richard's safety. The same evening she
visited, in disguise, the abode of Warbeck, and embraced, in a transport
of delight, the princely boy, in whose fate she interested herself with
all the fervour of her warm heart. She now learnt the design Lord Lovel
had of placing Richard in safety under Madeline's care in Flanders,
until his friends had prepared for him a triumphant return to England.
She concerted with her new friends the best mode of introducing Richard
into his mother's presence; and it was agreed that, early on the
following morning, Madeline and the duke should seek one of the small
chapels of the cathedral of Winchester, and that Elizabeth should there
meet her son. With an overflowing heart, Lady Brampton returned to
communicate this intelligence to the royal widow, and to pass with her
the intervening hours in oft-renewed conjectures and anticipations
concerning the duke of York.

To modern and Protestant England, a cathedral or a church may appear a
strange place for private assignations and concealed meetings. It was
otherwise in the days of our ancestors, when, through similarity of
religion, our manners bore a greater resemblance than they now do to
those of foreign countries. The churches stood always open, ready to
receive the penitent, who sought the stillness of the holy asylum the
more entirely to concentrate his thoughts in prayer. As rank did not
exempt its possessors from sin nor sorrow, neither did it from acts of
penitence, nor from those visitations of anguish, when the sacred temple
was sought, as bringing the votarist into more immediate communication
with the Deity. The queen dowager excited, therefore, no suspicion,
when, with her rosary formed of the blessed wood of Lebanon encased in
gold in her hand, with Lady Brampton for her sole attendant, she sought
at five in the morning the dark aisle of the cathedral of Winchester,
there to perform her religious duties. Two figures already knelt near
the altar of the chapel designated as the place of meeting; Elizabeth's
breath came thick, her knees bent under her, she leaned against a
buttress, while a fair-haired boy turned at the sound. He first looked
timidly on her, and then, encouraged by the smile that visited her
quivering lips, he sprung forward, and kneeling at her feet, buried his
face in her dress, sobbing, while, bending over him, her own tears fell
on his glossy hair. Lady Brampton and Madeline retired up the aisle,
leaving the mother and child alone.

"Look up, my Richard," cried the unfortunate widow; "look up, son of
King Edward,--my noble, my outcast boy! Thou art much grown--much
altered since I last saw thee. Thou art more like thy blessed father
than thy infancy promised." She parted his curls on his brow, and looked
on him with the very soul of maternal tenderness. "Ah! were I a
cottager," she continued, "though bereft of my husband, I should collect
my young ones round me, and forget sorrow. I should toil for them, and
they would learn to toil for me. How sweet the food my industry procured
for them, how hallowed that winch their maturer strength would bestow on
me! I am the mother of princes. Vain boast! I am childless!"

The queen, lost in thought, scarcely heard the gentle voice of her son
who replied by expressions of endearment, nor felt his caresses; but
collecting her ideas, she called to mind how brief the interview must
be, and how she was losing many precious moments in vain exclamations
and regrets. Recovering that calm majesty which usually characterized
her, she said: "Richard, arise! our minutes are counted, and each must
be freighted with the warning and wisdom of years. Thou art young, my
son! but Lady Brampton tells me that thy understanding is even
premature; thy experience indeed must be small, but I will try to adapt
my admonitions to that experience. Should you fail to understand me, do
not on that account despise my lessons, but treasure them up till thy
increased years reveal their meaning to thee. We may never meet again;
for once separated, ten thousand swords, and twice ten thousand dangers
divide us perhaps for ever. I feel even now that it is given to me to
bless thee for the last time, and I would fain to the last be the cause
of good to thee. I have lived, ah! how long; and suffered, methinks,
beyond human suffering; let the words I now utter live in thy soul for
ever; my soul is in them! Will not my son respect the sacred yearnings
of his mother's heart?"

Touched, penetrated by this exordium, the tearful boy promised attention
and obedience. Elizabeth sat on a low tomb, Richard knelt before her;
one kiss she imprinted on his young brow, while endeavouring to still
the beating of her heart, and to command the trembling of her voice. She
was silent for a few moments. Richard looked up to her with mingled love
and awe; wisdom seemed to beam from her eyes, and the agitation that
quivered on her lips gave solemnity to the tone with which she addressed
her young auditor.

She spoke of his early prospects, his long imprisonment, and late
fortunes. She descanted on the character of Henry Tudor, describing him
as wise and crafty, and to be feared. She dwelt on the character of the
earl of Lincoln and other chiefs of the house of York, and mentioned how
uneasily they bore the downfall of their party. No pains, no artifice,
no risk, she said, would be spared by any one of them to elevate an
offspring of the White Rose, and to annihilate the pretensions and power
of Lancaster. "Still a boy, unmeet for such contest, noble blood will be
shed for you, my son," she continued; "and while you are secluded by
those who love you from danger, many lives will be spent for your sake.
We shall hazard all for you; and all may prove too little for success.
We may fail, and you be thrown upon your own guidance, your unformed
judgment, and childish indiscretion. Alas! what will then be your fate?
Your kinsmen and partizans slain--your mother broken-hearted, it may
be, dead!--spies will on every side environ you, nets will be spread to
ensnare you, daggers sharpened for your destruction. You must oppose
prudence to craft, nor, until your young hand can wield a man's weapon,
dare attempt aught against Henry's power. Never forget that you are a
king's son, yet suffer not unquiet ambition to haunt you. Sleep in
peace, my love, while others wake for you. The time may come when
victory will be granted to our arms. Then we shall meet again, not as
now, like skulking guilt, but in the open sight of day I shall present
my son to his loyal subjects. Now we part, my Richard--again you are
lost to me, save in the recollection of this last farewell."

Her own words fell like a mournful augury on her ear. With a look of
agonized affection she opened her arms, and then enclosed in their
circle the stripling form of her son. She pressed him passionately to
her heart, covering him with her kisses, while the poor boy besought her
not to weep; yet, infected by her sorrow, tears streamed from his eyes,
and his little heart swelled with insupportable emotion. It was at once
a sight of pity and of fear to behold his mother's grief.

Lady Brampton and Madeline now drew near, and this effusion of sorrow
passed away. The queen collected herself, and rising, taking Richard's
hand in hers, with dignity and grace she led him up to the fair Fleming,
saying "A widowed mother commits to your protection her beloved child.
If heaven favour our right, we may soon claim him, to fill the exalted
station to which he is heir. If disaster and death follow our attempts,
be kind to my orphan son, protect him from the treachery of his enemies;
preserve, I beseech you, his young life!"

Madeline replied in a tone that showed how deeply she sympathized in the
queen's sorrows, while she fervently promised never to desert her
charge. "Now depart," said Elizabeth; "leave me, Richard, while I have
yet courage to say adieu!"

Elizabeth stood watching, while the forms of the prince and his
protectress disappeared down the dark aisle. They reached the door; it
swung back on its hinges, and the sound, made as it closed again,
reverberated through the arched cathedral. The unfortunate mother did
not speak; leaning on her friend's arm she quitted the church by another
entrance. They returned to the palace in silence; and when again they
conversed, it was concerning their hopes of the future, the schemes to
be devised; nor did the aching heart of Elizabeth relieve itself in
tears and complaints, till the intelligence, received some weeks
afterwards of the safe arrival of the travellers in France, took the
most bitter sting from her fears, and allowed her again to breathe
freely.




CHAPTER VI

LAMBERT SIMNEL


     Such when as Archimago him did view,
       He weened well to work some uncouth wile;
     Eftsoon untwisting: his deceitful clew,
       He 'gan to weave a web of cunning guile.

                                              SPENSER.


The birth of Arthur, prince of Wales, which took place in the month of
September of this same year, served to confirm Henry Tudor on the
throne, and almost to obliterate the memory of a second and resisting
party in the kingdom. That party indeed was overthrown, its chiefs
scattered, its hopes few. Most of the principal Yorkists had taken
refuge in the court of the duchess of Burgundy; the earl of Lincoln only
ventured to remain, preserving the appearance of the greatest privacy,
while his secret hours were entirely occupied by planning a rising in
the kingdom, whose success would establish his cousin Richard duke of
York, the fugitive Perkin Warbeck, on the throne. The chief obstacle
that presented itself was the difficulty of exciting the English to any
act of rebellion against the king, without bringing forward the young
prince as the principal actor on the scene. The confirmed friendship
between the queen and Lady Brampton had produced a greater degree of
intercourse between the former and the earl; but their joint counsels
had yet failed to originate a plan of action; when chance, or rather the
unforeseen results of former events, determined their course of action,
and brought to a crisis sooner than they expected the wavering purposes
of each.

Richard Simon had quitted Winchester to fulfil his duties as priest in
the town of Oxford. No man was better fitted than Simon to act a
prominent part in a state-plot. He was brave; but the priestly garb
having wrested the sword from his hand, circumstances had converted that
active courage, which might have signalized him in the field, to a
spirit of restless intrigue; to boldness in encountering difficulties,
and address in surmounting them. To form plans, to concoct the various
parts of a scheme, wedging one into the other; to raise a whirlwind
around him, and to know, or to fancy that he knew, the direction the
ravager would take, and what would be destroyed and what saved in its
course, had been from youth the atmosphere in which he lived. Now absent
from the queen, he was yet on the alert to further her views, and he
looked forward to the exaltation of her son to the throne as the
foundation-stone of his own fortunes. In what way could this be brought
about? After infinite deliberation with himself, Simon conceived the
idea of bringing forward an impostor, who, taking the name of Richard of
York, whose survival, though unattested, was a current belief in the
kingdom, might rouse England in his cause. If unsuccessful, the safety
of the rightful prince was not endangered; if triumphant, this
counterfeit would doff his mark at once, and the real York come forward
in his place.

In the true spirit of intrigue, in which Simon was an adept, he resolved
to mature his plans and commence his operations before he communicated
them to any. He looked round for a likely actor for his new part, and
chance brought him in contact with Lambert Simnel, a baker's son at
Oxford. There was something in his fair complexion and regular soft
features that was akin to York; his figure was slight, his untaught
manners replete with innate grace; he was clever; and his beauty having
made him a sort of favourite, he had grown indolent and assuming. His
father died about this time, and he was left a penniless orphan. Simon
came forward to protect him, and cautiously to point out the road to
fortune without labour. The youth proved an apt scholar. To hear speak
of princes, crowns, and kingdoms as objects in which he was to have an
interest and a share, dazzled his young eyes. He learnt speedily every
lesson the priest taught him, and adopted so readily the new language
inculcated, that Simon became more and more enamoured of his scheme, and
sanguine as to its results. The next care of Simon was to confirm, in
the partizans of the House of York, the suspicion they already
entertained of the existence of its noblest scion; he despatched
anonymous letters to the chief nobles, and it became whispered through
the country, though none knew the origin of the tale, that the surviving
son of Edward the Fourth was about to appear to claim the crown. The
peaceful sighed to think that the White and Red Roses would again be
watered by the best blood of England. The warlike and ambitious, the
partizans of York, who had languished in obscurity, walked more erect;
they regarded their disused armour with complacency, for war and tumult
was then the favourite pastime of high-born men.

It was at this period that, through the intervention of Lady Brampton,
Sir Thomas Broughton, a most zealous Yorkist and chief friend of Lord
Lovel, was introduced to the dowager queen's presence, then residing in
London. He came full of important intelligence. He had been roused from
his usual repose by one of Simon's anonymous letters, which hinted at
the existence of the duke of York, and counselled a drawing together of
such forces as would be willing to support him; Lord Lovel was with him,
and at the name of Richard at once prepared for action. He was busied in
raising adherents in the south, sending Sir Thomas to London, that he
might there receive the commands of the prince's mother. Scarcely had he
entered the metropolis, when in one of its narrowest alleys he was
accosted by Richard Simon, who had earnestly besought him to obtain an
audience for Simon himself from the queen; acknowledging that he was the
author of the reports and commotions, and that he had important secrets
to disclose.

All this inspired the queen with the deepest disquietude. She readily
arranged with Sir Thomas the desired interview, which, at Simon's
request, was to take place that very night, and agreed that he should
enter the palace by a private door. Lady Brampton giving him admittance.
Broughton departed; and Elizabeth, disturbed and agitated, counted the
hours impatiently which must intervene before the riddle was explained.

Even this interval was full of wonder. A report was circulated, which
soon reached the palace, that the earl of Warwick, in endeavouring to
escape from the Tower in a boat, had fallen into the river, and was
drowned before assistance could be afforded. Such was the current tale;
but many suspected that the king was privy to a more guilty termination
of his unhappy prisoner, of whose death none entertained a doubt. This
circumstance added to the queen's impatience--life was bound up in the
event of the next few hours.

The time arrived--all was quiet in the palace (the queen inhabited
Tower Royal); and the royal dowager and her friend prepared for their
visitor. At the signal given, the door was opened; but Simon came not
alone; the earl of Lincoln, Lord Lovel, Sir Thomas Broughton, and an
unknown youth--it was Edmund Plantagenet--entered. The tale of the
imposture of Lambert Simnel was disclosed, and with it a change of plan,
the result of the death of Warwick. Simnel's age and appearance accorded
better with this prince than with his younger cousin. It were easy to
spread abroad that the report of his death was a fiction contrived by
the king; that he had escaped, in fact, and was in arms. If a more
sinister fate had befallen him, guilt would impose silence on his
murderer; if the attempt failed, no evil would occur; if successful, he
would give instant place to the superior claims of the duke of York.

Lincoln unfolded these schemes with sagacity and deliberation, and the
queen eagerly adopted his ideas as he disclosed them. It was also the
earl's suggestion that Simnel should first appear in Ireland. The duke
of Clarence had been lieutenant there, and was much beloved throughout
the island. Through neglect and forgetfulness all the counsellors and
officers appointed by Clarence had been unremoved by the new government,
and might easily be induced to favour his persecuted son. The duchess of
Burgundy was also to be applied to; and counsel was held as to who
should be informed of the truth--who deceived in this hazardous
attempt. Night wore away, while still the conspirators were in
deliberation; they separated at last, each full of hope--each teeming
with gallant resolution. Henceforth the false smile or ill-concealed
frown of their enemy was indifferent to them; their good swords were
their sure allies; the very victory gained by Henry at Bosworth raised
their expectations; one other battle might give them again all that then
they lost.




CHAPTER VII

THE BATTLE OF NEWARK


     Within these ten days take a monastery;
     A most strict house; a house where none may whisper,
     Where no more light is known but what may make you
     Believe there is a day; where no hope dwells,
     Nor comfort but in tears.

                                    BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


With the consciousness of this plot weighing on her mind, Elizabeth
Woodville continued her usual routine of life, and made a part of the
court of Henry the Seventh. She had long been accustomed to pass from
one evil to the other, and to find that when one cause for unhappiness
died away, it gave instant place to another. She felt, with all the
poignancy of a mother's disappointed pride, the situation of her
daughter. Neglect was the lightest term that could be applied to the
systematized and cold-hearted tyranny of Henry towards his wife. For not
only he treated her like an unfavoured child, whose duty it was to obey
without a murmur, and to endeavour to please, though sure of being
repulsed. At the same time that he refused to raise her above this state
of degradation, he reproached her with the faults of maturity, and
stung her womanly feelings with studied barbarity. He taunted her with
her attachment, to her family and its partizans; spoke with triumph of
its overthrow; and detailed with malignant pleasure every severe
enactment passed by himself against the vanquished Yorkists. Then,
again, he accused her of participating in her parent's intrigues; and
though proud of the son she had given him, as the heir of his crown, he
divided, as much as possible, the infant from the mother, under the
avowed though ridiculous pretence of preventing her from inculcating
principles of rebellion towards his liege and father.

This last blow sunk deep. She had hitherto borne his harshness meekly,
sustained by the hope of overcoming his flinty nature by softness and
yielding. She had anticipated that the fresh enmity conceived against
her on the event of Lord Lovel's rebellion would be entirely allayed by
her pretty Arthur, whose birth was solemnized by many rejoicings. But
when she found this last hope fail, every expectation of good died away
with it. Among other acts of duty, she had for a long time pursued a
system of self-denial, deeming it a breach of duty to complain of her
husband, even to her mother. But this mother, acquainted with the
secrets of the human heart, and desirous of detaching her entirely from
her husband, exerted all the influence that one experienced and firm can
exercise over the young and vacillating: she brought her to lament her
situation, and to complain of each fresh token of the king's disregard.
The barrier of self-restraint once broken through, the sympathy and
remonstrances of her parent emboldened her to such a change of conduct
towards Henry, as at first excited his surprise, then his contempt. The
many rumours afloat concerning the existence of the duke of York served
also to rouse his angry mood. If at first he appeared somewhat
complaisant towards his mother-in-law, it was from an endeavour to put
her off her guard, and to attract or surprise her confidence on the
point which lay nearest his heart; but when he found that his attacks
were vain, his undisguised arrogance and her ill-concealed resentment
produced scenes, disgraceful in themselves, and agonizing to the wife
and daughter who was their witness.

At this moment, when suspicion was abroad--the Lancastrians fearful,
the Yorkists erect with renewed hopes--like the bursting of a
thunderstorm came the intelligence of the appearance of the earl of
Warwick in Dublin, his enthusiastic reception there, the rising of the
people in his favour, and the menaces held out by him of his intention
to wrench the sceptre of England from the hand of him who held it.

Henry alone heard these momentous tidings with contempt. The earl of
Kildare, lord-lieutenant of the kingdom, had received the pretender with
princely honours; yet the very circumstance of a false son of Clarence
being supported by the Yorkists was the occasion of satisfaction to him;
his only fear arose from the probable mystery covered by these designs.
He was angry at the disloyalty manifested; but it was in a distant
province, and so came not home to him. There appeared no falling off, no
disturbance among his English subjects. Still caution and policy were
the weapons he best loved to wield; and he despatched several spies to
Ireland, to endeavour to fathom the extent and nature of the rebellion.
The chief among them was his own secretary, Frion, a Frenchman--a
crafty and experienced implement. He succeeded in bringing back
irrefragable proof that the dowager queen mingled deeply in the plot.

Henry hated Elizabeth Woodville. He considered that it was principally
through her restless scheming that he had been forced to marry the
portionless (her detested claim to his crown her only dower) daughter of
York, instead of forming an union with a foreign princess; perhaps Mary
of Burgundy, or Anne of Britanny, either of whom would have brought gold
to his coffers, or extensive domains to his empire. He hated her,
because he deeply suspected that she was privy to the existence of a
formidable rival to his state. He _knew_ that the young duke of York had
not died in the Tower. In every way she was his enemy; besides that
linked to her ruin was the sweet idea of confiscation, one ever
entertained with delight by the money-loving king.

He assembled a council in his palace at Shene, which stood near where
Richmond now stands. The chiefs of the English nobility were his
counsellors. The duke of Buckingham, son of him who first favoured, and
then rose against Richard the Third. The lords Dawbeny and Broke, who
had been raised to the peerage for their services in the same cause.
Lord and Sir William Stanley, men to whom Henry principally owed his
crown. Others there were of high rank and note; but the king paid most
attention to two priests: John Morton, bishop of Ely, and Richard Fox,
bishop of Exeter, were his private advisors and friends, as well as
public counsellors. Morton had watched over his interests while in
exile; he first had excited the duke of Buckingham to revolt, and
hatched the plot which placed Richmond on the throne.

The council held was long and solemn, and the results brought about more
by insinuation than open argument, were different from those expected by
most of the persons present. First it was resolved that a general pardon
should be proclaimed to the insurgents. No exceptions were to be made;
those persons then in the very act of setting up his adversary were
included; for as, by the second decree, that the real earl of Warwick
should be shown publicly in London, the deception would become manifest;
if indeed they were deceived, it was thought more politic to reclaim
them by clemency, than by severe measures to drive them to despair.

The third and last enactment was levelled against the queen dowager.
Many of the council were astonished to hear it proposed, that she should
forfeit all her goods and lands, and be confined for life in a convent,
for having consented to the marriage of her daughter and Richard the
Third, while the ready acquiescence of the king and his chief advisers
made them perceive that this measure was no new resolve. These three
decrees passed, the council separated, and Henry returned to
Westminster, accompanied by Sir William Stanley. To him he spoke openly
of the treason of the queen: he even ventured to say, that he was sure
that some mystery lurked beneath; he commissioned Stanley, therefore, to
notify the order of council to her majesty; but at the same time to show
her, that disclosure, and reliance on the king, would obtain her pardon.
Sir William Stanley was a courtier in the best sense of the term; a man
of gentle manners; desirous of doing right, easily excited to
compassion, but ambitious and timid; one in truth than whom none could
be more dangerous; for his desire to please those immediately before
him, led him to assume every appearance of sincerity, and perpetually to
sacrifice the absent to the present.

Elizabeth heard, with utter dismay, the sentence passed against
her;--courage was restored only when she found that her freedom could
be purchased by the confession of her son's existence, and place of
abode. She repelled Stanley's solicitations with disdain; answered his
entreaties with an appeal to his own feelings, of how far, if such a
secret existed, it were possible that she, a mother, should intrust it
to the false and cruel king. Stanley speedily found his whole battery of
persuasion exhausted; he withdrew in some wonder as to what the real
state of things might be, and full of the deepest compassion. She had
indeed scarcely veiled the truth to him; for, calling to mind the fate
of the wretched Margaret of Anjou, she asked him, whether, like her, she
should expose the young orphan York to the fate of the Lancastrian
Prince Edward. But Stanley shrunk from being privy to such disclosures,
and hastily withdrew.

Henry had not exhausted all his hopes: glad as he was to wreak his
vengeance on the queen, and to secure her possessions to himself, he was
not so blind as not to see that the knowledge of her secret were a far
greater prize. His next implement was her eldest son, the marquess of
Dorset. Lord Dorset had been so active in his opposition to Richard the
Third, and had done such good service to his adversary, that Henry
overlooked his near kindred to the queen dowager, regarding him rather
as the representative of his father. Sir John Gray, who had fallen in
the cause of Lancaster. He became indeed a sort of favourite with the
king. Dorset was proud, self-sufficient, and extravagant, but his
manners were fascinating, his spirit buoyant, and Henry, who was
accustomed to find the storms of party lowering like winter over his
domestic circle, found relief only when Dorset was present. The present
occasion, however, called forth other feelings in the haughty noble; he
might be angry with his mother's plotting, but he was more indignant at
the severity exercised against her; and far from furthering Henry's
designs, he applauded her resistance, and so irritated the king, that it
ended by his sudden arrest, and being committed to the Tower.

And now all hope was at an end for the unhappy lady. The various acts of
her tragic history were to close in the obscurity and poverty of a
convent-prison. Fearful that her despair would lead her to some deed
that might at least disturb the quiet and order he loved, Henry had
resolved that no delay should have place, but that on the very morrow
she should be conveyed to Bermondsey. She was to be torn from her
family--her five young daughters, with whom she resided. The heartless
tyrant was callous to every pang that he inflicted, or rejoiced that he
had the power to wound so deeply one whom he abhorred. Lady Brampton was
with her to the last; not to sustain and comfort her; the queen's
courage and firmness was far greater than that of her angry friend; she
pointed out the hope, that the cruelties exercised towards her might
animate the partisans of York to greater ardour; and tears forced
themselves into her eyes only when she pictured Richard, her victorious
sovereign and son, hastening to unbar her prison doors to restore her to
liberty and rank. The night was spent in such discourses between the
ladies. With early dawn came the fated hour, the guard, the necessity
for instant departure. She disdained to show regret before Henry's
emissaries; and with one word only to her friend--"I commit _him_ to your
guidance," she yielded to her fate; submitting to be torn from all she
loved, and, without an expressed murmur, entered the litter that bore
her singly to her living grave.

The same sun that rose upon the melancholy progress of Elizabeth
Woodville towards Bermondsey, shone on a procession, more gaudy in
appearance, yet, if that were possible, more sad at heart. This was the
visit, ordered by the king, of the earl of Warwick to St. Paul's
Cathedral; thus to contradict to the eyes of all men the pretender in
Ireland. Warwick had spent a year in the Tower, in almost solitary
imprisonment. Hopeless of freedom, worn in health, dejected from the
overthrow of all the wild schemes he had nourished at Sheriff Hutton,
linked with the love he bore his cousin, the Lady Elizabeth, now queen
of England, he could hardly be recognized as the same youth who had been
her companion during her residence there. He was pale; he had been
wholly neglectful of his person; carking sorrow had traced lines on his
young brow. At first he had contemplated resisting the order of being
led out as a show to further his enemies' cause: one futile and vague
hope, which could only have sprung up in a lover's heart, made him
concede this point. Perhaps the court--the queen would be there.

He met several noble friends, commanded by Henry to attend him; for it
was the king's policy to surround him with Yorkists, so to prove that he
was no counterfeit. Alas!


     "These cloudy princes, and heart-sorrowing peers,"


assembled like shadows in the dim abyss, mourning the splendour of the
day for ever set. They entered the cathedral, which stood a heavy Gothic
pile, on a grassy mound, removed from all minor edifices. There was a
vast assemblage of ladies and knights; all looked compassionately on
this son of poor murdered Clarence, the luckless flower, brought to
bloom for an hour, and then to be cast into perpetual darkness. The
solemn religious rites, the pealing organ, the grandeur of the church,
and chequered painted light thrown from the windows, for a moment filled
with almost childish delight the earl's young heart; that this scene,
adapted to his rank, should be so single and so transient, filled his
soul with bitterness. Once or twice he thought to appeal to his noble
friends, to call on them to resist the tyrant--Elizabeth's husband. His
heart chilled at the idea; his natural timidity resumed its sway, and he
was led back to the prison-fortress, despairing, but unresisting.

Yet, at this hour, events were in progress which filled many hearts with
hope of such change as he would gladly hail. On the news of the queen's
arrest. Lord Lincoln had departed with all speed to Flanders, to his
aunt, the duchess of Burgundy, to solicit her aid to attack and overcome
the enemy of their vanquished family. The Lady Margaret, sister of
Edward the Fourth of England, and wife of Charles the Rash of Burgundy,
was a woman distinguished by her wisdom and her goodness. When Charles
fell before Nancy, and his more than princely domains descended into the
hands of his only child, a daughter--and the false Louis the Eleventh
of France, on one hand, and the turbulent Flemings on the other,
coalesced to rend in pieces, and to prey upon, the orphan's
inheritance--her mother-in-law, the Lady Margaret, was her sage and
intrepid counsellor; and when this young lady died, leaving two infant
children as co-heirs, the dowager duchess entirely loved, and tenderly
brought them up, attending to their affairs with maternal solicitude,
and governing the countries subject to them with wisdom and justice.
This lady was warmly attached to her family: to her the earl of Lincoln
and Lord Lovel resorted, revealing the state of things--how her nephew,
young Richard, was concealed in poor disguise in French Flanders, and
how they had consented to Richard Simon's plots, and hoped that their
result would be to restore her brother's son to the throne of their
native land.

The duchess of Burgundy possessed a proud and high spirit. The abasement
in which her niece, the Lady Elizabeth, was held by the earl of
Richmond; she, the real giver of his crown, not having herself been
crowned; the rigour exercised towards the Yorkist chiefs, many of whom
had been her defenders and friends in time of flight and defeat; the
calumnies heaped on the various members of her royal house; made a
prospect of displanting Henry, and of revenge, grateful to her. She
acceded to the earl's request, gave him an aid of two thousand Germans,
led by Martin Swartz, a man of family and note in Germany, providing
them with vessels to take them to Ireland, and blessing their expedition
with her best and earnest wishes.

On their arrival in Dublin, a gay and brilliant scene was acted, which
raised the enthusiasm of the Irish, and spread a glory round the
impostor they supported. The exhibition of the real earl of Warwick had
produced no effect in Ireland; Thomas Geraldine, earl of Kildare,
asserted that Henry had brought forward a counterfeit, and Lambert
Simnel lost no credit among them. He was proclaimed king of England; he
was crowned by the bishop of Meath with a diadem taken from an image of
the Blessed Virgin; a parliament was convoked in his name, and every
measure taken to insure his power in Ireland, and to gather together
forces wherewith to invade the sister island.

The English lords felt far more anxiety than their allies in the result
of this insurrection. Although it had been disregarded by the Irish, the
effect produced in England by the visit of Warwick to St. Paul's was
such as Henry had anticipated, and the counterfeit in Ireland found few
supporters among the Yorkists. Still it was necessary to end as they had
begun: to acknowledge the imposture, so to bring forward the young son
of Edward, would have been to all appearance too barefaced a cheat.
Lovel, as a gallant soldier, was ready to spend his blood in any
enterprise that promised to advance the White Rose; but he, as well as
the earl of Lincoln, mingling sad memories of the past with careful
forethought, looked forward to the result of Richard Simon's contrivance
with well-founded dread. Still they entertained no thought of retreat,
but mustered their forces, and counselled with their associates for the
furtherance of the cause. On the 4th of June, Lambert Simnel, under the
name of Edward the Sixth, with his, so called, cousin De la Poole, Lord
Lovel, and their constant attendant young Edmund Plantagenet, the Lords
Thomas and Maurice Geraldine, with their force of savage scarce-armed
Irish, and Martin Swartz, with his German auxiliaries, landed at the
pile of Foudray, in Lancashire, where they were soon after joined by Sir
Thomas Broughton, who brought some few English to fight and die for this
unhappy conspiracy.

Henry was prepared for their arrival: to gain grace in his subjects'
eyes, he first made a pilgrimage to Our Lady of Walsingham, and then,
proceeding to the midland counties, held council to know whether it were
best to encounter his foes out of hand, or to let them drag on; so to
weary them by delay. A number of nobles and their followers joined the
king, and it was agreed among them to press forward, before the enemy
should gather force in England. Henry had a further view in this: he
could not tell how far the secret of their plot, which he felt assured
was the design to advance the young son of Edward, was divulged among
the Yorkists, and how far believed; as yet the enterprise bore no ill
guise for him, having at its head a manifest impostor; so he hastened
onward to crush it utterly, before it assumed a more fearful
form. The earl of Lincoln, eager to try the fortune of battle,
advanced also on his side, and the rival armies drew nigh each other at
Newark-upon-Trent. The king pitched his tents three miles beyond the
town; and on the same night the earl encamped at Stoke, but a few miles
distant. And now, after a reign of two years, as he had forced King
Richard to fight for his crown against him, an adventurer and an invader
in his realm, did Henry Tudor find himself in his adversary's position,
about to risk life and kingdom on one cast of the die against troops as
ill-assorted but as desperate and brave as his had been. Henry felt in
his heart's core the thrilling pang, which a conviction that all is in
the hands of fortune must ever impart to a human being who is her slave.
He felt that his crown was but an usurpation, that his anointed and
sacred head claimed no reverence from these enemies; he was degraded in
his own eyes from being a sceptred king upheld by the laws, to a wild
adventurer, his good sword his right; a fierce but disciplined anger
filled his heart; his brows were bent, his voice was attuned to
harshness, his thoughts were conversant with overthrow and death. The
hour was come; he was impatient for its passing, and he led forth his
troops, all well-appointed English soldiery, in such hope as the sight
of a noble army might well inspire, in such dread as was the natural
offspring of the many chances and changes that had occurred to the
sovereigns of England during the late struggles.

The earl of Lincoln cherished still mightier fears; yet there was more
of calm and dignity in his meditations than in the impatient misgivings
of Henry. His heart sickened at the idea of battle and bloodshed: he
felt himself responsible for the lives of all: and, while this nerved
his heart to courage, it took rest from his eyes, and planted sorrow
deep in his manly breast. The morrow! oh, the morrow! hours full of
fate! whose looks forward and sees in the morrow the crown or ruin of
the hopes of many, may well pray the swift-pacing hours to lag, and
night to remain for ever as a spell to stop the birth of time.

But the morrow came; a day of slaughter and captivity for the Yorkist
party. The battle was hard fought; the German auxiliaries were veteran
soldiers, who spared neither blows nor blood; their leader, Martin
Swartz, for valour, for strength, and for agility of body, was inferior
to none among the warlike captains of those times. The Irish, though
half-naked and ill-armed, fought with desperate bravery. In vain; the
valour of Henry's soldiers was equal, their discipline and numbers
superior. First the noble Lincoln fell, and his comrades were
slaughtered around him, avenging his death. The Lords Geraldine, Swartz,
and Sir Thomas Broughton, were found among the slain; Lord Lovel was
never heard of more; the young Edmund Plantagenet, struck in the side by
a dart, lay for dead upon the ground. Richard Simon and his
false-seeming pupil were among the prisoners.

Such was the event of the last attempt of the Yorkists to raise the
bruised White Rose to its old supremacy. All of high rank and power that
owned this symbol were gone; Lincoln, the best column of its fortunes,
was destroyed; nothing remained, save the orphan prince, the royal
exile, a boy of thirteen years of age, brought up as the child of a
Flemish money-lender. To hide himself in safe obscurity was his only
wisdom, till time should give strength to his arm, sagacity to his
plans, and power to his acts; happy if he could find any concealment
sufficiently obscure, to baffle the discernment of Henry, and to save
him from the arts of those whom he would employ to discover and seize on
him.

Henry again felt himself secure on his throne: he deeply lamented the
death of Lincoln, as he had hoped to learn from him the secret of the
conspiracy. He found in Lambert Simnel the mere tool of others, and in
contempt made him a scullion in his kitchen, so to throw derision on the
attempt which had been made to exalt him. He dealt otherwise with
Richard Simon. In the secrecy of his prison, every art was practised to
induce him to make a full confession. Simon played a dastardly and a
double part, half revealing, half disguising the truth. Henry became
assured that his rival, the duke of York, survived, and he was led in
some sort to guess at the place of his abode. He had promised liberty to
Simon when the young prince should be in his hands; meanwhile he was
imprisoned in the monastery in which he was fated to close his
existence.




CHAPTER VIII

THE DISCOVERY



     Our king he kept a false stewarde,
       Sir Aldingar they him call;
     A falser stewarde than he was one,
       Served not in bower nor hall.

                                OLD BALLAD.


Whoever writes concerning the actions of the men of the olden time, must
sadden the reader by details of war, descriptions of fields of battle,
narrations of torture, imprisonment, and death. But here also we find
records of high virtues and exalted deeds. It is at first sight strange
that men whose trade was murder, who habitually wore offensive weapons,
whose chief happiness was derived from the glory they acquired by
inflicting misery on others, should be among those who live in our
memories as examples of what is most graceful and excellent in human
nature. Too great security destroys the spirit of manhood, while the
habit of hazardous enterprise strengthens and exalts it. It was not
because they destroyed others, that the warriors of old were famous for
honour, courage, and fidelity; but because, from some motive springing
from the unselfish part of our nature, they exposed themselves to danger
and to death.

It was at times such as these that friendship formed the chief solace of
man's life. The thought of his lady-love supported the knight during his
wanderings, and rewarded him on his return; but the society of his
brothers in arms shortened the weary hours, and made peril pleasure.
Death, the severer of hearts and destroyer of hope, is, in its actual
visitation, the great evil of life--the ineffaceable blot, the
tarnisher of the imagination's brightest hues; but if he never came, but
only hovered, the anticipation of his advent might be looked upon as the
refiner of our nature. To go out under the shadow of his dark banner,
hand in hand, to encounter a thousand times his grim likeness; to travel
on through unknown ways, during starless nights, through forests beset
with enemies, over mountains, whose defiles hid him but to assure his
aim; to meet him arrayed in his full panoply on the field of battle; to
separate in danger; to meet on the verge of annihilation; and still,
through every change, to reap joy, because every peril was mutual, every
emotion shared, was a school for heroic friendship that does not now
exist. In those times, also, man was closer linked with nature than now;
and the sublimity of her creations exalted his imagination, and elevated
his enthusiasm--dark woods, wild mountains, and the ocean's vast
expanse, form a stage on which, when we act our parts, we feel that
mightier natures than our own witness the scenes we present, and our
hearts are subdued by awe to resignation.

Edmund Plantagenet, the forest-bred son of Richard the Third, the late
companion of the illustrious Lincoln and gallant Lovel, lay long
insensible on the field of battle, surrounded by the dead--he awoke
from his swoon to the consciousness that they lay strewed around him
dead, whom he had worshipped as heroes, loved as friends. Life became a
thankless boon; willingly would he have closed his eyes, and bid his
soul also go on her journey to the unknown land, to which almost all
those to whom he had been linked during his past existence had preceded
him. He was rescued by a charitable friar from this sad state--his
wound was dressed--life, and with it liberty, restored to him. After
some reflection, the first use he resolved to make of these gifts was to
visit the young duke of York at Tournay.

Edmund's mind, without being enterprising, was full of latent energy,
and contemplative enthusiasm. The love of virtue reigned paramount in
it; nor could he conceive happiness unallied to some pursuit, whose
origin was duty, whose aim was the good of others. His father, his
ambition and his downfall, were perpetual subjects for reflection; to
atone for the first and redeem the last, in the person of his nephew,
became, in his idea, the only fitting end of his life. Fostering this
sentiment, he speedily formed the determination of attaching himself to
the exiled duke of York: first, to devote himself to the preserving and
educating him during childhood--and secondly, to fight and die for him,
when the time was ripe to assert his rights.

During his hazardous journey to Flanders, Edmund was supported by that
glowing sensation which borrows the hues and sometimes the name of
happiness; it was an ecstatic mood that soared above the meaner cares of
life, and exalted him by the grandeur of his own ideas. Self-devotion
is, while it can keep true to itself, the best source of human
enjoyment: there is small alloy when we wholly banish our own wretched
clinging individuality, in our entire sacrifice at the worshipped
shrine. Edmund became aware of the value of his own life, as he planned
how in future he should be the guardian and protector of his unfriended,
peril-encircled orphan cousin. A religious sentiment of filial love also
influenced him; for thus he could in some sort repair the wrongs
committed by his father. There was much in Edmund's temperament that
might have rendered him a mere dreamer. The baser ends of common men
possessed no attractions for him; but a lofty purpose developed the best
points of his character.

It was early dawn, when, a month after the battle of Stoke, Plantagenet,
in pursuance of his design, arrived at the cottage of Madeline de Faro,
where, under the lowly name of Perkin Warbeck, dwelt the noble scion of
the house of York. It was a lovely spot--trees embowered the cot, roses
bloomed in the garden, and jessamine and woodbine were twined round the
porch. The morning breeze and rising sun filled the atmosphere with
sweets. Already the cottagers were enjoying its fragrance, and Edmund,
as he alighted, beheld the object of his journey--the fair-haired
stripling prince and his protectress Madeline. Edmund was
one-and-twenty, but his brow was more bent, his eye more thoughtful, his
cheek more pale and sunk than befitted his age; it was only when he
smiled that frankness displayed solemnity, and those who conversed with
him were ever eager to call forth those smiles, which, like sunbeams
that chase the shadows on a green hill-side, made darkness light.
Confidence readily springs up between the open-hearted and good; and
Edmund and the inhabitants of the cottage found no impediment to entire
reliance on each other. Madeline was overjoyed that her young charge
should find manly guardianship in his cousin, and mentioned how often
her fears had been awakened on his account, and how suspicions had got
abroad concerning him among the citizens of Tournay.

Madeline, the sister of the Fleming, John Warbeck, was married to a
Spaniard in the service of Portugal. In those days, just previous to the
discovery of America by Columbus, while that illustrious man was
offering his unesteemed services at Lisbon, the Portuguese were full of
the spirit of enterprise and maritime adventure. Each year new vessels
were sent southward along the unexplored shores of Africa, to discover
beyond the torrid zone a route to India. Hernan de Faro was a
mariner--it was during one of his voyages to Holland that he had seen
and married Madeline, and he left her in her native country, while he
pursued his fortunes down the Golden Coast as far as the Cape of Good
Hope. He had been absent longer than she had anticipated, and each day
might bring the wanderer back, when he purposed taking her with him to
his native Spain. What, then, must become of Richard? Plantagenet saw at
once the necessity of visiting the court of Burgundy, and of placing her
nephew at the disposition of the Duchess Margaret.

The young prince was now fourteen--he had shot up in height beyond his
years, beautiful in his boyhood, and of greater promise for the future.
His clear blue laughing eyes--his clustering auburn hair--his cheeks,
whose rosy hue contrasted with the milk-white of his brow--his tall and
slender but agile person, would have introduced him to notice among a
crowd of strangers.

His very youthful voice was attuned to sweetness. If Edmund found the
Lady Margaret lukewarm, he need only lead the noble boy into her
presence to interest her in his favour. Richard heard with tearful eyes
of the imprisonment of his mother, and the slaughter of his kinsmen and
friends. His heart for the moment desired vengeance; he would himself
seek his aunt of Burgundy, and aided by her, attack the usurper. With
difficulty he permitted his cousin to depart alone; but he was obliged
to yield, and Plantagenet set out for Brussels, promising a speedy
return.

About a week after Edmund's departure, another visitor arrived at the
cottage of the exile. A violent storm had overtaken Duke Richard and his
constant companion, Madeline's daughter, in one of their wanderings in
the fields near Tournay. As they stood for shelter under a half-ruined
building, a traveller came to share the asylum. He was a Frenchman--a
Provençal by his accent; for he immediately entered into conversation
with them. As he is a man spoken of in the Chronicles, he shall receive
his name at once; this apparently chance-traveller was Frion, Stephen
Frion, King Henry's secretary. He had been employed to search out the
young prince by such tokens as Richard Simon had given, and chance had
caused him to fall in with Edmund, whom he had before remarked in
attendance on the earl of Lincoln. Easily guessing that Edmund's journey
might have connection with his own, he tracked him to Tournay, and then
by some untoward chance lost sight of him. The indefatigable spy had
spent the last week in a particular survey of every spot round the town
and in the neighbouring cities, to discover his lost clue. Overtaken by
a storm on his return from Lisle, he suddenly found himself under a shed
with a youth whose appearance at once excited his strongest curiosity.

What Frion loved beyond all other things was power and craft. He had
been a subject of the poetical King René of Provence; but, despatched
on some occasion to Louis the Eleventh, he entered into the service of
that monarch, whose subtlety and faithlessness were a school of wisdom
to this man. On one subject did he love to dwell--the contrast between
Charles of Burgundy and Louis of France; the first commencing his reign
by combating and vanquishing the latter, and dying miserably at last by
a traitor's hand, his armies cut to pieces, his domains the unresisting
prey of his rival; while Louis, by serpent ways, by words--not
deeds--gained every point, won every follower, and established his rule
at last over the greater part of the wide territories of the fallen
duke. In a minor way Frion aimed at imitating Louis; but he was
naturally more fiery and rash. He had visited Italy also, and studied
there the wiles and cruelties of the Italian lords; crossing back to
Marseilles, he had been seized by corsairs and carried to Africa:--here
he put in practice some of his lessons, and contrived to make himself a
favourite with his Mahometan master, who afterwards crossed to Spain to
serve under the Moorish king of Granada. Frion was quickly distinguished
for his sagacity in the divided counsels of this distracted kingdom, and
became the trusty adviser of him called Boabdil el Chico. When this
unfortunate sovereign was taken prisoner by the Spaniards, Frion was a
chief mediator between them and the Sultana Ayza. At the court of
Ferdinand and Isabella he met several Frenchmen, who awakened in his
heart a keen desire to revisit his native country. He took advantage of
an embassy thither from the court of Spain, to fulfil his wishes, but
arrived at Plessis only in time to witness Louis' death. Two years
afterwards he was found in the train of the earl of Richmond--the
future secretary, spy, and favourite of Henry the Seventh--now
travelling by his order to find, seize, or destroy, the last blossom of
the uprooted White Rose.

Frion was rather handsome in appearance, with bright black eyes and dark
hair, a complexion embrowned by the sun, a look of gaiety--unless when
controlled by the will of a superior, he was always laughing--a quiet
kind of sarcastic laugh; he looked not the man Cæsar would have feared,
except that his person was rather inclined to leanness; but he was
active and well versed in martial exercises, though better in clerkly
accomplishments. His early youth had been chiefly employed in copying
poetry for King René--he wrote beautifully, and his small white hands
were the objects of his own very great admiration. Such was his outward
look; he had stores of science and knowledge within, which he seldom
displayed, or, when necessary, let appear with all the modesty of one
who deemed such acquirements were of little worth--useful sometimes,
but fitter for a servitor than his lord. No words could describe his
wiliness, his power of being all things to all men, his flattery, his
knowledge of human nature, his unparalleled artifice, which, if it could
be described, would not have been the perfect thing it was: it was not
silken, it was not glossy, but it wound its way unerringly. Could it
fail--the rage and vengeance to follow were as certain as dire, for,
next to love of power, vanity ruled this man; all he did was right and
good, other pursuits contemptible and useless.

Such was the serpent-spirited man who contrived to partake Richard's
shelter; he eyed him keenly, he addressed him, and the prince replied to
his questions about an asylum for the night, by a courteous invitation
to his home. "The boy speaks not like a cotter: his eye beams with
nobleness. What a freak of nature, to make one in appearance a king's
son, the plodding offspring of a rude Fleming!" As these thoughts passed
through Frion's mind, the truth came not across him; and he even
hesitated for a moment whether he should not, now the storm had passed,
pursue his way: but his garments were wet, the ways miry, night at hand.
At a second thought he accepted the invitation, and leading his horse,
he accompanied the youthful pair to their cottage home.

Madeline, unsuspicious of one obviously a Frenchman, received him
without fear, and after a fire had dried the visitor's dress, they sat
down to a frugal supper. Frion, according to his usual manner, strove to
please his hosts. His gay discourse, the laughable, yet interesting
accounts he gave of various adventures that had befallen him, made all
three--the fair Madeline the ardent princely boy, and the dark-eyed
daughter of de Faro--sit in chained attention. When he heard that
Madeline was united to a Spaniard, he spoke of Spain, of Granada and the
Moorish wars; Richard's eyes flashed, and the dark orbs of the girl
dilated with wonder and delight.

At length he spoke of England, and his words implied that he had lately
come thence. "How fares the poor island?" asked the youth; "such stories
of its tyrant reach us here, that methinks its fields must be barren,
its people few."

"Had you been my comrade, young master, through merry Kent," said Frion,
"you would speak in another strain. Plenty and comfort, thanks to King
Harry and the Red Rose, flourish there. The earth is rich in corn, the
green fields peopled with fat kine, such as delight yon islanders. 'Give
an Englishman beef and mustard,' says our French proverb, 'and he is
happy;' they will find dearth of neither, while the sage Henry lives,
and is victorious."

"Yet we are told here," cried the youth, "that this Welsh earl, whom you
call king, grinds the poor people he has vanquished to the dust, making
them lament him they named Crookback, who, though an usurper, was a
munificent sovereign."

These words from a Fleming or a Frenchman sounded strange to Frion; the
doubt, which he wondered had not before presented itself, now came
full-fledged, and changed at its birth to certainty; yet, as the angler
plays with the hooked fish, he replied, "I, a stranger in the land, saw
its fair broad fields, and thought their cultivators prosperous; I heard
that the king was victorious over his foes, and deemed his subjects
happy. Yet, I bethink me, murmurs were abroad, of taxes and impositions.
They spoke, with regret, of the White Rose, and scowled when they said
that Elizabeth of York was rather a handmaiden in her husband's palace,
than queen of fertile England."

"Now, were I an English knight, with golden spurs," said the stripling,
"I would challenge to mortal combat that recreant Tudor, and force him
to raise fair Elizabeth to her fitting elevation: woe the while, all
England's good knights are slain, and the noble Lincoln, the last and
best of all, has perished!"

"You speak unwisely and unknowingly, of things you wot not of," said
Madeline, alarmed at the meaning glance of Frion; "good nephew Perkin,
your eyes see not even the English white cliffs, much less can your mind
understand its dangerous policy."

"Nay, dear mother," remarked her little daughter, "you have told me that
the noble earl and the good Lord Lovel had been kind guardians to my
cousin Peterkin: you chid him not when he wept their death, and you may
suffer him to reproach their foe."

"I know nothing of these lords," said Frion, "whose names are a
stumbling-block to a Frenchman's tongue. But methinks it is well for us
that they aim at each other's hearts, and make booty of their own
provender, no longer desolating the gay fields of France with their iron
hoofs."

And now, since that he had found him whom he sought, Frion talked again
of other matters, and, as before, his smooth and gay discourse gained
him pleased auditors. At length, the peaceful cottagers retired to rest,
and Frion sunk to sleep under their hospitable roof, after he had
thought of various plans by which he might possess himself of the
prince's person;--the readiest and safest way was to entice him to
accompany him alone some little space, no matter how short: he trusted
to his own skill to draw him still further and further on, till he
should be put on board the boat that would ferry him to his own revolted
England.




CHAPTER IX

THE DECOY


     Gilderoy was a bonnie boy,
       Had roses tull his shoone;
     His stockings were of silken soy,
       With garters hanging doon.

                           OLD BALLAD.


It was a simple scheme, yet with the simple simplicity succeeds best. A
new face and talk of distant lands had excited York beyond his wont. He
could not rest during the long night, while the image of his disastrous
fortunes haunted him like a ghost. "Were I the son of a falconer or
hind," he thought, "I could don my breastplate, seize my good cross-bow,
and away to the fight. Mewed up here with women, the very heart of a
Plantagenet will fail, and I shall play the girl at the sight of blood.
Wherefore tarries Sir Edmund, our gentle coz? If he be a true man, he
shall lead me to danger and glory, and England, ere she own her king,
shall be proud of her outcast child."

To a mind thus tempered--heated like iron in a smith's forge--Frion,
on the morrow, played the crafty artisan, fashioning it to his will. He
and the prince rose early, and the secretary prepared for immediate
departure. As he hastily partook of a slight repast, he renewed the
conversation of the preceding night, and like the Sultaness Scheherezade
(perhaps he had heard of her device among the Moors), he got into the
midst of the quarrels of El Zagal and El Chico, the kings of Granada, at
the moment it was necessary for him to hasten away--"Good youth," said
he, "I play the idle prater, while mine errand waits for me--lead me to
the stable, and help me to saddle my nag; if you will serve me as a
guide to Lisle, you will do a good deed, and I will reward it by
finishing the strange history of the Moorish kings."

The horse was quickly in order for departure. "I will but say good day
to ray kinswoman, and go with you," said Richard.

"That were idle," replied the secretary, "the sun has hardly peeped out
from his eastern window, and dame Madeline and her dark-eyed daughter
sleep; we kept them waking yesternight; they will scarce have risen ere
you return."

The duke suffered himself to be persuaded--with his hand on the neck of
the horse, he strode beside his tempter, listening to his cunning tales
of Moorish ferocity and Christian valour. The walls of Lisle at length
appeared--"Here we part," said the duke, who remembered the caution
given him, never to enter these border towns, where the English nobles
often resided for a space, and the appearance of the gallant stripling,
and his close resemblance to other members of the princely house of
York, might beget suspicion and danger.

"Wherefore this haste, Sir Perkin?" said Frion; "cooped up under a
thatched roof from Lent to Shrovetide, methinks you should be glad to
stretch your chain. I remain brief space in yonder walls; leave me not
till I depart."

"Who told you I was cooped up?" said the prince, hastily; "if I am
chained, the key of my fetters is in my own hand."

"Put it swiftly in the wards then, and cast away the heavy iron; come on
with me, to where thou shalt ruffle bravely with satin-coated squires."

Frion judged his prize already won, and almost threw aside his usual
caution. Richard liked not the expression his sharp black eye assumed,
nor the wrinkling of his brow; he began to wonder what there had been in
this man so to allure him into friendly converse; now that in a familiar
tone he invited him to continue his companion, his haughty spirit
revolted. "Good sir," said he, "I now have done a host's duty by you. I
saved you from a storm, restored you to your road--yonder path, shaded
by poplars, leads at once to the town's gate--farewell!"

"I am but an unmeet comrade for you, gay gentleman," said Frion; "pardon
me if I have said aught unfitting the cottager of Tournay to hear. I now
go to the noble knight, the Sire de Beverem, and I would fain have shown
him what striplings these swamps breed; methought his gilt palace were
fitter dwelling than yonder hut for one, who, if his face lie not,
aspires to nobler acts than weeding a garden or opening a drain. Come,
my lord,--how tript my tongue? but your eye is so lordly that the word
came of itself--gentle youth, trust yourself with one, who loves to see
the fiery youngster amid his mates, the gallant boy looked on with love
and favour by the noble and valiant."

Prudence whispered to Richard that this was dangerous sport; pride told
him that it were unfit, nameless, and ushered thus, to appear before the
high-born; but thoughtless youth urged him on, and even as Frion spoke,
at a quick pace they approached the town-gate. The Sire de Beverem too,
whom the wily Frenchman named, had been favoured by Edward the Fourth,
and was his guest in London--"Let the worst come, and it were well to
have made such a friend. I will bear myself gallantly," thought York,
"and win the good knight's smile; it may profit me hereafter. Now I
shall see how the world goes, and if any new device or fashion have
sprung up among our chivalry, that I may seem not quite untaught when I
lead the sons of my father's friends to the field. Be it as you please,"
he said to his seducer, "before now my hand has grasped a foil, and I
will not shame your introduction."

Frion went forward conning his part; he felt that his task was not so
easy as he had imagined: the boy was wild as a bird, and so gave in to
the lure; but, like a bird, he might away without warning, and speed
back to his nest ere his wings were well limed. It was many miles to the
coast: Frion's resolution had been hastily formed. The Lord Fitzwater, a
partisan of Henry, was then sojourning at Lisle. He had been to
Brussels, and on his return towards Calais a sickness had seized him,
which forced him to remain some weeks under the roof of the Sire de
Beverem; he was recovering now, and on the eve of his departure; without
confiding the whole secret to him, the papers and tokens Frion bore must
vouch that the king would thank any of his lieges who should aid him in
bringing by force or decoy a pretended son of the traitor earl of
Lincoln (for thus Frion resolved to name his victim) to the English
shores.

Yet the decoyer had a difficult part to play; there was a quickness in
the prince's manner which made him fear that, if his intentions changed,
his acts would not lag behind; and though he did not betray suspicion,
he was so perfectly alive to everything said and done, that any
circumstance of doubt would not fail immediately to strike him. Although
they had hitherto discoursed in French, yet it was certain that his
native English had not been forgotten by him; nay, the appearance of the
Lord Fitzwater's attendants, their livery, their speech, must awaken the
prince's fears, and confound the wiles of his enemy. Frion pondered on
all these obstacles, as he rode gently through the narrow streets of
Lisle; at length they reached the abode of the French noble, and here
Frion halted; while the duke, beginning to be ill-satisfied with the
part he played, and his promised presentation by such a roan, almost
resolved to break from him here and to return; shame of appearing feeble
of purpose alone prevented him. At last, passing through the court-yard
up a dark and massy staircase, he found himself in a hall, where several
men at arms were assembled, some furbishing pieces of armour, others
engaged in talk, one or two stretched along the benches asleep: pride
awoke in the youth's breast, he had gone too far to retrace his steps,
and he resolved to bear himself gallantly towards the noble to whom he
was about to be presented: yet, pausing for a moment, "My memory," he
thought, "leads me far a-field, or some of these men bear English
badges, and their wearers seem grey-eyed Englishmen." Frion meanwhile,
selecting with quick tact one of the followers of the Sire de Beverem
who chanced to be among these men, requested an instant introduction to
Lord Fitzwater, using such golden arguments that the man, half afraid of
being called on to divide the spoil, motioned him quickly to follow,
and, passing through a suite of rooms, as he approached the last, he
said, "He is there, I will call his page." "It needs not," said Frion;
"await me here, Sir Perkin," and pushing forward, to the astonishment of
the attendant, entered unannounced to the baron's presence: Richard
thought he heard a "By St. Thomas!" uttered as the door closed hastily;
but some Englishman might be with the French noble, and though a
momentary wonder crossed him, no doubt of Frion's integrity was
awakened.

"By Saint Thomas!" exclaimed Lord Fitzwater, as Frion almost burst into
his apartment, "what rude varlet is this? Are serfs so used to enter a
baron's chamber in France?"

"Most noble sir," said Frion, "if in three words, or, if you refuse me
these, if in one eye-glance, I do not satisfy you, bid your men beat me
with staves from the door. I am here in King Henry's service."

"God save him!" said the noble, "and you, sir knave, from the fate you
name, which will be yours undoubtedly, if you do not give me good reason
for your ill-mannered intrusion."

Frion looked round. Except the baron there was no one in the room, save
a stripling of about sixteen years. The lad, though short in stature,
was handsome; yet there was a look that indicated the early development
of qualities, which, even in manhood, detract from beauty. He seemed
conversant in the world's least holy ways, vain, reckless, and selfish;
yet the coarser lines drawn by self-indulgence and youthful sensuality,
were redeemed in part by the merry twinkling of his eye, and the ready
laugh that played upon his lips. "My words are for your ears alone, my
lord," said Frion, "and be assured they touch your liege nearly."

"Go, Robert," said Fitzwater, "but not further than the ante-chamber."

"There is one there," said Frion, anxiously: "he must not quit it--he
must not escape, nor learn in whose hands he is."

"Your riddles, sir, ill please me," replied the noble.

"Look at this paper, my lord, and let it vouch for the heavy import of
my business."

Lord Fitzwater recognized his royal master's signature, and with an
altered tone he said, "Leave us, Robert; tarry not in the ante-chamber,
but bear my greeting to my noble host, and ask him, when I may, at his
best leisure, pay my thanks to him and my kind lady. I depart to-morrow
at dawn; and mark, speak not to the stranger who waits without."

The youth made obeisance, and departed. A piece of tapestry hung before
the door, which, together with the massy boards themselves, prevented
any sound from piercing to the other side; the lad was about to proceed
on his errand, when curiosity prompted him to look on the stranger, with
whom he was commanded not to parley. Richard stood in the embrasure of
one of the windows, but turned quickly as the folding-door shut with no
gentle sound; his candid brow, his bright blue eyes, his frank-hearted
smile, who that had ever seen could forget them? nor were the traits of
the other's countenance less marked, though less attractive. The words
burst at the same instant from either--"My Lord of York!" "Gentle Robin
Clifford."

"My prison playfellow," cried the prince; "this for me is a dangerous
recognition. I pray you be wise, and--as you were ever--kind, and keep
my secret close."

"Alas! my lord," said Robert, "you have opened your hand, and let the
winged fool fly unwittingly, if you think it has not been discovered by
yonder false loon. Know you where you are?"

"Then I am betrayed! I see it, feel it. Farewell, Robin, my fleet legs
will outrun their slow pursuit."

"Nay, an' that were possible," said Clifford; "but it is not; let me
better advise your highness; trust me you shall be free; but hark, they
come; I must not be found here. Show no suspicion; yield to your fate as
if you knew it not, and confide in me; my hand on it, this night you are
at liberty."

Clifford quitted the apartment by the opposite door, while Frion entered
from the other, beckoning the duke to approach. He took him by the hand,
and led him to Lord Fitzwater, who started back when he saw him, and was
about to exclaim; but Frion, in French, addressing him as the Sire de
Beverem, entreated his kind favour for Perkin Warbeck, the gallant youth
before him. The baron evidently was ill-pleased at the part he had
consented to play; he said a few words with an ill grace, and bidding
Perkin welcome, promised him favour, and permission for the present to
remain in his abode. Richard saw through the flimsy disguise which the
Englishman threw over his native speech, though he did not know who his
receiver was; but, feeling that it was best to follow his young friend's
counsel, he replied, also in French, that, at his guide's invitation, he
had eagerly sought an interview with the renowned Sire de Beverem; that
the honour done him would be deeply engraven in his heart; that on some
future occasion he would gratefully avail himself of his offers; but, at
the present time, he had left his home without intimating any intention,
of a prolonged absence, and that he owed it to a kind kinswoman, not to
disquiet her by delaying his return. He prayed the noble to dismiss him
therefore, craving leave only to attend him some other day.

"Be it so," said Fitzwater; "to-morrow at dawn you shall depart hence;
but you must not refuse my proffered hospitality. I shall introduce you
to my household as one who ere long will be admitted into it, and show
my friend. Sir Lalayne, who is now here, what gentle boors our Flanders
breeds."

"I can return to-morrow, my good lord," Richard began; but the noble not
heeding him, added, "Stay till my return; I now go to hear mass," and
passed hastily from the chamber.

The prince's first impulse was to reproach Frion's knavery, assert his
freedom, and, ere any measures had been taken to secure his person, to
quit his new prison. But he did not know how deep-laid the plot might
be; he was inclined to think that all was prepared for his reception and
safe custody, so that any open attempt to regain his liberty would be
resisted by force; while, through the assistance of his friend Clifford,
he might hope to escape, if, giving in to the stratagem, he took
occasion by the curb, and forced it to his purpose. "Are you mad," said
Frion, "my rustic, that you resist the proffers of a high and powerful
man of your native land?"

Richard wondered, when he beheld Frion's sneer and crafty glance, how he
had not mistrusted him from the moment he beheld him; the double meaning
of his words, and the familiar tone in which they were uttered, grated
him like a personal insult. He repressed the angry reply rising to his
lips, and said, "It seems I must submit, yet I should be beholden to you
if you contrived an excuse, and lent me your horse, that I might ride
back and inform Dame Madeline. To-morrow I might return."

Frion opposed this intention, and led the prince to a chamber at some
distance from any other, at the end of a corridor, saying, "that it had
been assigned to him;" and after a short conversation left him. Richard
heard the shooting of the bolt as the door closed; "Son of King Edward,"
he thought, "thy folly disgraces thy parentage; thus at once to have run
into the gin. Yet I am of good cheer, and my heart tells me that I shall
relate the merry tale of my escape to Madeline and my sweet coz, and dry
this night the tears my disappearance has caused them to shed." It soon
appeared, by the long absence of his betrayer, that it was not intended
to continue the farce longer; but that, from the moment he had entered
that chamber, he was in treatment as well as in fact a prisoner. After
several weary hours had elapsed, his blithe spirit began to sink; he
reflected that Clifford had probably promised more than he could
perform; but courage awoke with the sense of danger; he resolved to be
true to himself, and to effect his escape singly, if he could gain no
assistance. "Men have ears and hearts," he thought, "and I can work on
these; or they may be neglectful while I am on the alert, and I can
profit by their carelessness. In all forms my fortune may take, I will
not fail to myself; and there is small danger in any change for a true
man. With my light spirit and resolved will, I could, I doubt not,
persuade an armed band to make way for me, or open prison bolts with
charming words, though my witchcraft be only that of gentle courtesy,
moulding with skilful hand the wax of soft humanity." Pacing the
apartment, he continued these meditations, imagining every circumstance
that might and would arise, and how he was to turn all to the best
advantage. He framed persuasive speeches, wily answers to ensnaring
questions, cautious movements, by which he might withdraw himself from
the hands of his enemies; and while he thus occupied himself, his eyes
gleamed, and his cheeks glowed, as if the moment of action had come, and
his life and liberty depended on instant deed.

At two hours past noon the door was unclosed, and a servant entered
bearing food; impatient to begin his plans of escape, Richard was about
to speak to him, when, in the doorway, he beheld the slight, stunted
figure of Clifford, whose forefinger was pressed on his lips, and who,
after exchanging one glance with his friend, cast aside his stealthy
expression of countenance, entering with a half-swaggering look, and
saying, in French, "My lord, young sir, has sent me on a pleasant
embassage, even that of dining with your pageship, saying, two boys like
us were better and merrier together, than in the great hall with the
arrogant serving-men." Richard felt no great appetite; but taking the
tone from his friend, he thanked him, and they fell to on the viands.
"Now, kind Thomas," said Clifford, "of your bounty bring us a stoup of
wine; the day is rainy, and we cannot abroad; so ray gossip and I will
tell long stories over our bottle, and lay some plan of merry mischief
which you and your fellows may in good time rue."

The domestic obeyed; nor till the wine was brought, the servant fairly
dismissed, and the door closed, did Clifford put aside the character he
had assumed of a stripling page, in a noble master's abode, entertaining
a stranger visitant of his own years. At length, when they were quite
alone, the merry boy put his hands to his sides and indulged in so gay a
peal of laughter, that the prince, who at first stared in wonder, at
last caught the infection, and laughed too, while tears from
superabundant glee streamed down their cheeks. Once, twice, and thrice
did Richard check himself, and turn seriously to inquire the cause of
this merriment; and Clifford strove to answer; but laughter bubbling up
choked his voice, and both again yielded in accord to the overpowering
fit. At last gasping, holding their sides, and by degrees commanding
their muscles, the duke said, "I would ask you, friend Robin, what this
means? But at the word, lo you! your very voice is lost. Now, prithee,
feel half as weary as I do of this folly, and you will be as grave as
tumbledown Dick. Do you remember the simpering fellow we made good sport
of in the Tower?"

"You have broken the spell, my lord," said Clifford; "that word suffices
to make me as grave as Brakenbury himself, when he looked on your
brother's corpse. Ah dear, your highness, the name of the Tower is worse
than a raven's croak! God and St. Thomas preserve you from ever getting
the other side of its moat!"

"Amen, Robin, with all my heart," said Richard; "a shudder runs through
my limbs down to my finger tips, making the skin on my head creep, when
I think there is any chance of my passing long years in those dreary
cells, with their narrow deep windows; the court-yards, which the sun
seldom visits; the massy dark walls, whose black stones seemed to frown
angrily if our childs' voices were ever heard in sport."

"There your cousin, my lord of Warwick, pines out his melancholy days,"
replied Clifford; "and that is your destined abode. My grandfather was
slain by Queen Margaret's side, and stained the Red Rose with a
blood-red dye, falling in its cause. Your father and his brothers did
many a Clifford much wrong, and woe and mourning possessed my house till
the line of Lancaster was restored. I cannot grieve, therefore, for the
exaltation of the earl of Richmond; yet I will not passively see my
playmate mewed up in a cage, nor put in danger of having his head laid
on that ungentle pillow in Tower Yard. The daughter of Warwick, our
Edward's affianced bride, your crookbacked uncle's wife, loved my pranks
and nurtured my youth; and by her good leave, many a mirthful hour I
spent in the dark place you name. May neither of us ever see it more!"

"You will, then, assist my escape?" asked Richard.

"As faithfully, gossip Dickon, as God his grace shall await me at the
last day! And now I will tell you a merry tale."




CHAPTER X

THE ESCAPE


            --It is thy merit
     To make all mortal business ebb and flow
     By roguery.

                                   HOMER'S HYMN TO MERCURY.


     And then, with you, my friends, and the old man,
     We'll load the hollow depth of our black ship,
     And row with double strokes from this dread shore.

                                               THE CYCLOPS.


Notwithstanding the promise Clifford made of a merry tale, both he and
his auditor looked grave as he commenced. Richard expected, with some
anxiety, an explanation from his friend, and the other assumed the
self-consequence resulting from having achieved a victory. No two beings
ever displayed, in their way, a greater contrast than these youths. The
prince was many inches taller than his companion, and his slim make
promised increase of height. His brow was smooth as infancy, candid as
day; his bright blue eyes were lighted up with intelligence, yet there
was a liquid lustre in them that betokened tenderness; nor did his lips,
that nest of the heart's best feelings, belie his eyes. They were full,
a little curled, can we say in pride, or by what more gentle word can we
name a feeling of self-elevation and noble purpose, joined to
benevolence and sweetness? His oval cheeks were rounded by the dimpled
chin, and his golden hair clustered on a throat of marble whiteness,
which, as the white embroidered collar thrown back over the doublet,
permitted the outline to be seen, sustained his head as the Ionic flute
rears its graceful capital. Clifford was shorter, but firm set and more
manlike in form, his grey eyes were bright or dull as his soul spoke in
them; his brow slightly scowled, pending over, and even thus early,
lines were delved in it, hardly seen when he was in repose, but which,
as he spoke, showed deep and distorted; his smile was tinctured by a
sneer, his voice attracted no confidence, yet Richard now hung intently
on it as he spoke:

"When I returned from doing my lord's bidding, I found him moving about
the room, more like a parched pea than a stately noble; for now he stood
still, and then shot off with a quick step, showing every sign of being
ill at ease. Now, boy as I am, for I can number but sixteen summers, my
lord more than loves me, he trusts me, and not without cause--for when
at hazard--but my story will be too long--enough that ere now I have
done him service. Had I not known the cause of his disquiet I should
have asked it, but, believing myself fully aware of what this all meant,
I went to my post, and busied myself in making some flies for angling,
seeming most intent upon my work. My lord stood over me, and twice or
thrice fetched a sigh, and then strode away, and came again, saying, "I
am a fool, a dolt--the king can mean no ill to this lad--and yet--" I
cannot tell you how long this indecision lasted, while I patiently
toiled at a fly of green and gold, bright as those which trouts love to
snap at in clear streams during May. At length he asked me, 'Robin, did
you mark the boy that stood in the ante-chamber?' 'Aye, my good lord!'
'And what thought you of him?' 'Thought, my lord?' I spoke inquiringly,
for it suddenly came across me that he did not know you, and it was not
for me to betray your secret. 'Aye,' he replied, 'thought? Does he
resemble any one you ever knew? Of what country do you divine him to
be?' 'These Flemings are sandy-haired,' I said, 'yet he does not look of
Flanders. Methinks he seems English born.'

"'You are right,' said he, 'English he is confessedly. This Frion calls
him a natural son of De la Poole--of the late Earl of Lincoln. He says
that he has knowledge of a secret treasure concealed by his father
before this last rebellion, and the king wishes to get him into his
hands, thus to secure the gold. The tale is not unlikely, for the Tudor
ever loved the glitter--nay, the very dust of the precious metal,--and
the boy resembles strangely the House of York. Yet, I care not for the
task put upon me of kidnapping a child, and of betraying him into his
enemy's hands--perhaps of delivering him up a prisoner for life, for
the sake of---- Poor fellow! if he know aught of a concealed treasure,
in God's name, let him confess it while on this side the fatal channel
that now divides him from tyranny or death.' 'Let me deal with him,' I
said, 'let me throw out some toy, such as is this gold and green thread
to a silly fish, and learn the truth; if he discovers the hiding-place
of this so coveted coin, we may spare him the trouble of his enforced
journey.' 'I know not that,' answered my patron; 'Master Frion is
earnest for his safe keeping; and no one is nearer our liege's inner
wishes than this Provençal, who served him in exile, and who followed
him in his expedition thence; and yet there is a noble daring in the
boy, a mountain freshness in his cheek, a springy freedom in his gait,
that it were a thousand pities to fetter and limit within narrow prison
bounds.' Seeing that my lord was thus favourably inclined, I used all my
poor eloquence to urge him further, and at last brought him to consent
that I should converse with you; learn, if possible, your secret; inform
you of your danger, and advise you to escape. One only difficulty
remained: my lord had promised this master secretary that none should be
admitted to talk with you; but when the subtle fiend, the double-dealing
Frenchman entered, I told him with a long visage, that our noble host,
the Sire de Beverem, had heard that we were carrying off by force a
Fleming; and that, considering his hospitable mansion stained by the
act, he had commanded strict watch to be kept on the morrow, that if any
of the English suite were unwilling to go, or appeared in durance, he
should be rescued. It was advisable therefore, that you should be kept
in good-humour till fairly beyond the gates of Lisle; and this my
wisdomship offered to do, if admitted to parlance with you. You look
grave, sir prince, but had you seen Frion's sage look of hesitation, and
heard his many exhortations that I would by no means betray my knowledge
of who you really were; and how I, with a bow, careful as if my curls
were white from years, promised discretion, you would laugh as I did,
when, the mime over which I played before the servitor, I doffed my
page's seeming equality, and in duteous phrase to his highness of York,
offer my best services to liberate him."

"That seems already done," said Richard; "usher me to the Lord
Fitzwater. I will declare myself to him; his compassion already
excited----"

"Would then be cool as snow at Christmas. Wise young sir, Baron
Fitzwater wears the blushing Rose; and for him there is wormwood in the
name of York. Now, as a chance offshoot of the white thorn, he only sees
in you a harmless boy, whom it were sin to injure; but give yourself a
name whose very echo would bring St. Albans, Tewkesbury, Bosworth Field,
and a thousand scaffolds streaming with his kinsmen's blood before him,
and without remorse he would let Frion have his will of you. Even I,
Duke Richard, I am sprung from those who fell for Lancaster----"

"Enough," replied the prince, haughtily. "I am content to stand alone,
to achieve my freedom singly, or to submit to my fate."

"Not so, my noble, playmate," said the other. "I will not offer you my
knee, my oath, my sword, for my allegiance belongs to the anointed King
of England; but, I beseech you, suffer Robin Clifford to assist
high-born Plantagenet to escape from a prison or from death; permit him
to pay, if not the duty of a subject, yet that of a loving friend to the
former companion of his childish sports."

Richard listened somewhat sullenly to these offers; he ill brooked the
thought that any of English parentage should, knowing who he was, refuse
to acknowledge him for his liege: but Clifford would not be refused;
while it was hardly worth while to contend with his light spirit, which
appeared incapable of a serious or profound idea. After a short
resistance, therefore, the duke entered willingly into a discussion of
the best means of effecting his escape in such a way, that he should
have several hours the start of Frion, and be distant from danger before
his seducer could discover that he was not still safe in his hands.

In the midst of this discussion, Frion suddenly entered. The stake for
which he played was too momentous to trust it wholly to the stripling
page, and distrust of the wily boy entered also into his calculations;
he broke in, therefore, not only unannounced, but with such stealthy
quiet as showed that he meant to pounce on his victim unawares. The
youths sat, their stools drawn close; Clifford was leaning forward
earnestly propounding his schemes, and Richard listened, his whole soul
in his countenance. Frion was close upon them before he was perceived by
either, his eyes glimmering with their usual suspicious look. The
artless Richard started, and would with a conscious mien have drawn
back; but Clifford, more used to the wiles and watchfulness of others,
and his own double mode of action, continued to speak in the same tone
the same words, without moving a muscle. The prince wondered, and
regained his self-possession; not from entering into the deceit of his
companion, but from the haughty sentiment of his own dignity, which even
in danger refused to cower.

Clifford had been saying--"I will hence to the sire: a word to him of
whose secretary this Provençal is, and insinuation that he is now on a
secret expedition to the Flemish towns, will awaken his curiosity; he
will send for him; fortunately the good knight speaks so slow that a
mass can be said while he is introducing the subject of his inquiries;
as each word expires, he pauses while a requiem might be sung for its
death; our antagonist will writhe and--" and a glance askance informed
the speaker that this man was at his side: he continued--"and strive
vainly to escape; the heavy weight will be too much for him, he must
submit. Such feints suit well us boys who have not strength nor skill
for more declared warfare. To-morrow's dawn I will practise with you in
the court of the castle ere you depart. But, indeed, my gossip, you must
promise to be at Calais on the sixteenth, when we shall see a combat of
good knights fit for royal princesses to look on. And now, fair sir,
farewell; here is your friend. The Sire de Beverem commanded my presence
at this hour. If I see you not again to-night, the saints have you in
their keeping!"

When Clifford, with his pagelike vivacity, ran from the room singing a
gay romance, Frion felt himself embarrassed; and more so when Richard
said,--"My guest, it is hard, after giving you harbourage last night,
that I should be forced, whether I will or not, to tarry here, leaving
my kinswoman in dread and doubt. Make you my excuse to the chevalier,
and delay me no longer, I beseech you."

Frion, without directly replying, said, "Anon I will speak of that;
meanwhile, I have news for you." And he entered into a long account of
an expected sedition in Flanders, and how the Sire de Beverem had
promised to enlist Perkin Warbeck in his particular troop, when with
courage and good fortune, he could not fail to rise. While he was
talking, one of the men-at-arms of the noble entered, and notified to
Frion that his lord desired an instant interview with him. The secretary
hastened to obey; he thought that good fortune itself provided this
excuse for him to escape from his victim, and resolved not again to
present himself before him. He was scarcely gone when Clifford returned.
"Now quick," he cried, "down the back staircase! My own steed stands
saddled for you; ride fast and far--but whither--whither do you intend
to go?"

"In the first place, to Dame Madeline's cottage."

"That were midsummer madness," cried Clifford; "Frion will never rest
till he ensnares his bird again; nay, though I trust he will not
discover your escape till to-morrow morning, that part of my scheme may
fail; and his papers from the king are such, that my lord could not
refuse to aid him, I pray you set space and cloudy mystery between you."

"It shall be so. Probably I shall seek refuge at Brussels; but I must
see my gentle guardian and my sweet cousin, calm their fears, and bid
them farewell."

They had descended a narrow winding staircase; Clifford unlocked a
postern, opening on a dark alley. A small light-limbed horse stood
without, held by a stout, almost gigantic fellow. "Here, Bryan," said
Clifford, "this is the smuggled article of which I spoke. Convey it in
safety to the gate; once without, the road is known. How now, sweeting!
you sit your steed as if you were used to this gear--in truth thou art
a false one--yet take care--fold your cloak thus. Not one kiss ere we
part?" He sportively snatched the prince's hand, and pressing it to his
lips, continued, "No weeping, lovely: my merry heart hates tears like
verjuice. The blessed Virgin protect you; I must in. Remember, in every
ill, Robert Clifford is your fast, your sworn friend. Look at her,
Bryan; one would swear by her bearing it were a beardless page, and not
a long-haired girl; remember, though gamesome, she is gentle, and
respect her on your life."

Laughing at his own deceits, the guileful boy re-entered the mansion;
nor could Richard avoid smiling at the merry and ready subterfuges which
his friend had at command on every occasion. Brian demurely held the
rein, and hardly hazarded a look or covert joke, as, with a pace that
put the pony to a trot, he led the prince through the narrow streets to
the western gate. The youth breathed freely when, after having passed
the hollow sounding drawbridge, he saw the dark wall of the town behind
him, and before, the green plain. In his haste he scarcely bestowed a
benison on his guide; but snatching the rein from his hand, and with the
other throwing some money at his feet, and exclaiming, "Beware of
prating, as thou art willing to save thyself from the whipping-post!" he
impatiently struck his unarmed heel against the horse's sides, and
bounded swiftly forward. Bryan picked up the angels, and told them
slowly, as he said "I meant to have paid myself in other coin; but, by
St. Julian, she rides more like a trooper than a gentle dame--and her
speech--Master Robert has before now entrusted a damsel to my guidance,
but they ever spoke me lovingly, with 'fair Sir,' and 'sweet Bryan!'
Forsooth, Flemish girls ruffle more like pranksome pages than
soft-cheeked wenches."

The thought of his conductor had passed as swiftly from the prince's
thoughts, as he made the ground fly from under his horse's hoof. He was
aware that he did neither the safest nor best thing in seeking, like a
hunted hare, the form from which he had been roused in the morning; but
the desire of calming Madeline's anxiety, and imprinting a farewell kiss
on the sweet lips of her daughter, prevented him from altering his first
purpose. The night was cloudy and very dark, but the road was known to
him, and he continued at full speed till a voice, calling aloud,
attracted his attention--the words could not be mistaken--his own
name, "Perkin Warbeck!" sounded through the night. His first thought
was, that he was pursued, but reflection told him that assuredly his
pursuers would not halloo to him, while any sent in search of him by
Madeline, might naturally so try to stop him as he rode so fast through
the dark. He checked his speed, therefore, and in a few moments a
cavalier, a stranger was at his side, mounted on a tall black horse; his
form seemed gigantic, and little else could be discerned; the stranger
spoke to him in French, with a foreign accent. He asked him, "Are you
not he they call Perkin Warbeck?" This address was sufficiently
startling; and the youth haughtily replied, "My name imports not to you,
while to me this interruption is unseasonable."

"Enough; you go towards the cottage of Madeline de Faro: I follow your
highness thither."

Richard grasped the small poniard which hung from his belt; yet how
could he, a child, contend with the tall and muscular form beside him?
"Whoever thou art," he cried, "and whoever I may be, follow me not; I am
no serf to be seized and carried back to his suzerain. Depart in God's
name, that the fingers of neither may receive an ill stain!"

"Thou art a gallant boy!" cried the stranger, as placing his hand on the
youth's arm, his most gentle touch was felt as an iron vice pressing on
his flesh: "Pardon, my lord, the interference of one unknown to you,
though I will not call myself a stranger. I am Hernan de Faro, the
husband of Dame Madeline; now stay not your speed, while we hasten to
relieve her thousand fears. I am come in search of you."

The heart of Richard warmed towards his new friend; he felt, that with
him on his side, he might defy Frion, Fitzwater, and all their
followers; for there was something in De Faro's mien, which spoke of a
thousand combats, and as many victories; his deep voice out-roared the
elements; his hand might arrest a wild horse in mad career. When they
arrived at the wicket entrance to the cot, he lifted the boy from the
saddle, as a child would handle a toy, and shouted aloud in his own
language, "Viva el Duque de Inglatierra y el Marinero, Hernan de Faro."

The dangers Richard had run, and the delight she experienced in seeing
him, when again under her roof, stopped all Madeline's reproaches. "Is
he not worthy all my fears?" she said to her husband, who stood eyeing
the boy as he caressed his daughter. De Faro stretched out his hand,
saying, "Will you, Señor Don Ricardo, accept my services, and my vow to
protect you till the death, so help me the Blessed Virgin and the Holy
Trinity."

De Faro was a mariner who had sailed in the service of the king of
Portugal, along the unsounded shores of Africa, and sought beyond the
equator a route to the spicy Indian land. His dark skin was burnt to a
nearly negro die; his black curled hair, his beard and moustachios of
the same dusky hue, half hid his face; his brow somewhat lowered over
eyes dark as night; but, when he smiled, his soft mouth and pearly
teeth, softened the harshness of his physiognomy, and he looked gentle
and kind. Every nerve, every muscle, had been worn and hardened by long
toilsome navigation; his strong limbs had withstood the tempest, his
hands held unmoved the cordage, which the whirlwind strove vainly to
tear from his grasp. He was a tower of a man; yet withal one, to whom
the timid and endangered would recur for refuge, secure of his
generosity and dauntless nature. He heard the story of Richard's
dangers; his plan was formed swiftly: he said, "If you choose, Sir
Prince, to await your foes here, I am ready, having put these girls in
safety, to barricade the doors, and with arquebus and sword to defend
you to the last: but there is a safer and better way for us all. I am
come to claim my Madeline and our child, and to carry them with me to my
native Spain. My vessel now rides off Ostend. I had meant to make
greater preparation, and to have laid up some weeks here before we went
on our home-bound voyage; but, as it is, let us depart to-night."

The door suddenly opened as he spoke--Madeline shrieked--Richard
sprang upon his feet, while De Faro rose more slowly, placing himself
like a vast buttress of stone before the intruder. It was Clifford.

"All is safe for the night," he cried; "your grace has a few hours the
start, and but a few; dally not here!"

Again the discussion of whither he should fly was renewed, and the duke
spoke of Brussels--of his aunt. "Of poison and pit-falls," cried
Robert; "think you, boy as you are, and, under pardon, no conjuror, that
the king will not contrive your destruction?"

Probably self-interested motives swayed Clifford; but he entered warmly
into De Faro's idea of hastening to the sea-coast, and of sailing direct
for Spain. "In a few years you will be a man--in a few years----"

"Forgotten! Yes--I may go; but a few months shall mark my return. I go
on one condition; that you, Clifford, watch for the return of my cousin,
Sir Edmund, and direct him where to find me."

"I will not fail. Sir Mariner, whither are you bound?"

"To Malaga."

And now, urged and quickened by Clifford, who promised to attend to all
that this sudden resolve left incomplete, the few arrangements for their
departure were made. Favoured by night, and the prince's perfect
knowledge of the country, they were speedily on their way to Ostend.
Clifford returned to Lisle, to mark and enjoy Frion's rage and
Fitzwater's confusion, when, on the morrow, the quarry was found to have
stolen from its lair. Without a moment's delay, the secretary followed,
he hoped, upon his track: he directed his steps to Brussels. A letter
meanwhile from Ostend, carefully worded, informed Clifford of the
arrival and embarkation of his friends; again he was reminded of
Plantagenet; nor had he long to wait before he fulfilled this last
commission.

Edmund had found the Lady Margaret glad to receive tidings of her
nephew; eager to ensure his safety and careful bringing-up, but
dispirited by the late overthrow, and deeply grieved by the death of the
noble and beloved Lincoln: no attack could now be made; it would be
doubly dangerous to bring forward the young Richard at this juncture.
She commissioned Plantagenet to accompany him to Brussels that she might
see him; and then they could confer upon some fitting plan for the
privacy and security of his future life, until maturer age fitted him to
enter on his destined struggles.

Edmund returned with brightened hopes to Tournay, to find the cottage
deserted, his friends gone. It may easily be imagined that this
unexpected blank was a source of terror, almost of despair to the
adventurer. He feared to ask questions, and when he did propound a few,
the answers only increased his perplexity and fears. It was not until
his third hopeless visit to the empty dwelling, that he met a stripling
page, who, with an expression of slyness in his face, spoke the
watch-word of the friends of York. Edmund gladly exchanged the
countersign, and then the boy asked him, whether he called himself
cousin to the fugitive duke of York, laughing the while at the
consternation his auditor exhibited at the utterance of this hidden and
sacred word: "You come to seek your prince," he continued, "and wonder
whither he may be flown, and what corner of the earth's wilderness
affords him an abode. He is now, by my calculations, tossing about in a
weather-beaten caravel, commanded by Hernan de Faro, in the Bay of
Biscay; in another month he may anchor in the port of Malaga; and the
dark-eyed girls of Andalusia will inform you in what nook of their sunny
land the fair-haired son of England dwells. The king is defeated, Master
Frion balked, and Lord Fitzwater gone on a bootless errand: the White
Rose flourishes free as those that bloom in our Kentish hedges."

Without waiting for a reply, but with his finger on his lip to repel
further speech, the youth vaulted on his horse, and was out of sight in
a moment. Edmund doubted for some time whether he should act upon this
singular communication. He endeavoured to learn who his informant was,
and, at last, became assured that it was Robert Clifford, a young
esquire in Lord Fitzwater's train. He was the younger son of the Lord
Clifford who fell for Lancaster, at the battle of St. Alban's. By birth,
by breeding, he was of the Red Rose, yet it was evident that his
knowledge was perfect as to the existence of the duke of York; and the
return of Lord Fitzwater and King Henry's secretary to Lisle,
disappointed and foiled, served to inspire confidence in the information
he had bestowed. After much reflection, Plantagenet resolved to visit
Paris, where he knew that the brother of Madeline, old John Warbeck,
then sojourned; and, if he did not gain surer intelligence from him, to
proceed by way of Bordeaux to Spain.




CHAPTER XI

THE EXILES


     A day will come when York shall claim his own;
     Then York be still awhile, till time do serve.

                                                 SHAKSPEARE.


The further Edmund journeyed from the late abode of his lost cousin, the
more he felt displeased at the step he had taken; but on his arrival in
Paris his uncertainty ended. Warbeck had received intimation of the
hurried embarkation of his sister, and here also he found Lady Brampton,
whose husband had taken refuge in Paris after the battle of Stoke. Like
the queen dowager, the fate of Margaret of Anjou's son haunted this
lady, and she warmly espoused the idea of bringing the duke of York up
in safe obscurity, until his own judgment might lead him to choose
another line of action, or the opposing politics of Europe promised some
support to his cause. She agreed to repair herself to Brussels, to take
counsel with the duchess, to use all her influence and arts, and, as
soon as time was ripe, to proceed herself to Spain to announce it to the
prince. Meanwhile, Plantagenet, following his former purpose, would take
up his abode with Richard in Spain; teach him the science of arms, and
the more difficult lessons of courage, self-command, and prudent
conduct. In pursuance of this plan, Edmund lost no time in going to
Bordeaux, whence he embarked for Malaga, and following his friend's
steps, arrived shortly after him at the retreat De Faro had chosen among
the foldings of the mountains on the borders of Andalusia.[1]

De Faro's was a singular history. In those days, that park of Andalusia
which comprised the kingdom of Granada, was the seat of perpetual wars,
and even when armies did not meet to deluge its fertile plains and
valleys with their blood, troops led by noble cavaliers and illustrious
commanders overran its districts in search of plunder and glory. During
one of these incursions, in the year 1452, some impulse of religion or
humanity made a Spanish soldier snatch from a couch in the country-house
of a noble wealthy Moor, already half consumed, an infant hardly a year
old; the band was already in full retreat, and, fortunately, this
incident took place on the very frontiers of Granada, or the benevolence
of the soldier would hardly have been proof against the trouble his
little charge occasioned him. Toiling up the mountains on their return
to the kingdom of Jaen, they entered the little town of Alcala-la-Real,
where, on the side of the mountainous road, rose the walls of a
monastery. "How better," thought the soldier, "save the soul of this boy
than by giving him to the monks?" It was not, perhaps, the present they
would most readily have selected, but compassion and piety forbade them
to refuse it: the little Moor became a Christian by the name of Hernan,
and was brought up within the sacred precincts of the convent. Though
the monks were able to make a zealous Catholic of their nursling, they
did not succeed so well in taming his fiery spirit, nor could they
induce him to devote himself to the inactive and mortifying life of a
priest. Yet he was generous and daring, and thus acquired their
affection; next to being a recluse vowed to God, the vocation of a
soldier for the faith, in the eyes of these holy men, was to be
selected. Hernan advancing in life, and shooting up into strong and
premature manhood, was recommended by the abbot to his cousin, the
illustrious Don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, marquess of Cadiz. He fought
several times under his banners, and in the year 1471 entered with him
the kingdom of Granada, and was wounded at the taking of Cardela. In
this last action it was, that a sudden horror of taking up arms against
his countrymen sprung up in Hernan's breast. He quitted Spain in
consequence; and, visiting Lisbon, he was led to embrace a sea-faring
life, and entered the marine service of the king of Portugal; at one
time, visiting Holland, where he sought and won the hand of Madeline:
and afterwards, with Bartholomew Diaz, he made one of the crew that
discovered the Cape of Good Hope. He sailed with three vessels, one of
which lost company of the others, and its crew underwent various and
dreadful perils at sea, and from the blacks on land: after nine months
they again fell in with their companions, three sailors only remaining.
One of these was Hernan de Faro; his skill, valour, and fortitude, had
saved the vessel; he was exalted to its command, and now, in safer
voyage over seas more known, he had freighted it with the fugitives
from Tournay.

During all his wanderings, even in the gay and rich Portugal, Hernan
turned with fond regret to his mountain home. To its rugged peaks, its
deep and silent dells; its torrents, its verdure, its straggling and
precipitous paths; its prospect over the rich and laughing Vega of
Granada. He had promised himself, after weary toils, a long repose in
this beloved spot; and hither he now led his wife, resolving to set up
his tent for ever in the land of his childhood, his happy childhood. It
was a strange place to choose, bordering on Granada, which at that time
was as lists in which Death and Havock sat umpires. But the situation of
Alcala-la-Real preserved it secure, notwithstanding its dangerous
neighbourhood. It was perched high upon the mountain, overlooking a
plain which had been for many years the scene of ruthless carnage and
devastation, being in itself an asylum for fugitives--a place of rest
for the victor--an eagle's nest, unassailable by the vultures of the
plain.

Here, then, Plantagenet found his cousin; here, in lovely and romantic
Spain. Though defaced and torn by war, Andalusia presented an aspect of
rich and various beauty, intoxicating to one whose life had been spent
in the plains of England, or the dull flats of Flanders. The purple
vineyards; the olive plantations clothing the burning hill-side; the
groves of mulberry, cork, pomegranate, and citron, that diversified the
fertile vegas or plains; the sweet flowing rivers, with their banks
adorned by scarlet geranium or odoriferous myrtle, made this spot
Nature's own favoured garden--a paradise unequalled upon earth. On such
a scene did the mountain-home of the exiles look down. Alcala, too, had
beauties of her own. Ilex and pine woods clothed the defiles of the
rugged Sierra, which stretched far and wide, torn by winter torrents
into vast ravines; variegated by a thousand intersecting lines, formed
by the foldings of the hills; the clouds found a home on the lofty
summits; the wandering mists crept along the abrupt precipices;
alternate light and shadow, rich in purple and golden hues, arrayed each
rocky peak or verdant slope in radiance all their own.

All this fair land had been under the dominion of the Moors. Now, town
by town, stronghold by stronghold, they had lost it; the riches of the
land belonged to the Christians, who still, by military conquest or
policy, pressed the realm of the Moorish sovereign into a narrower
compass; while, divided in itself, the unhappy kingdom fell piecemeal
into their hands. De Faro was a devout Catholic; but, with all his
intrepidity, more humanity than belonged to that age warmed his manly
heart. He remembered that he was a Moor: whenever he saw a Moslem
prisoner in chains, or a cavalgada of hapless women driven from their
native towns to slavery, the blood in his veins moved with instinctive
horror; and the idea that among them might pine and groan his parents,
his own relatives, burned like living coal in his breast. He had half
forgotten this when he came to Alcala, bringing his wife and child, and
resolved to set up here his home; but when, in the succeeding spring,
the Spanish army assembled on the frontiers of Murcia, and swept on
towards the south--when deeds of Moorish valour and Moorish suffering
reached Alcala--when the triumph of the Christians and their ravages
were repeated--the gallant mariner could endure no longer. "It is a
fruitless struggle," he said; "Granada must fall; and God, who searches
hearts, knows that his victory will be dear to me when the cross floats
from the towers of the Alhambra. But I cannot behold the dark,
blood-stained advances of the invader. I will go--go where man destroys
not his brother, where the wild winds and waves are the armies we
combat. In a year or two every sword will be sheathed; the peace of
conquest will reign over Andalusia. One other voyage, and I return."

He went without fear, for Alcala appeared a safe retreat, and left his
family spectators of the war. What a school for Richard! Edmund rejoiced
that he would be accomplished in knightly exercise in the land of
chivalry; but he was not prepared for the warlike enthusiasm that sprung
up in his cousin's heart, and even in his own. It was the cause of God
that armed the gentlemen of Spain, that put daring into the politic
Ferdinand's heart, and inspired with martial ardour the magnanimous
Isabella. The veteran cavaliers had lost many relatives and companions
in arms, in various defeats under the rocky castles, or within the
pathless defiles of Andalusia; and holy zeal possessed them to avenge
their deaths, or to deliver those who pined in bondage. The younger
knights, under the eye of their sovereigns, emulated each other in
gallantry and glory. They painted war with pomp, and adorned it by their
virtues.

Not many months before, the earl of Rivers, with a band of Englishmen,
aided at the siege of Loxa, and distinguished himself by his undaunted
bravery; his blunt but gay humour; his eager emulation with the Spanish
commanders. The duke of York heard, with a leaping heart, his mother's
brother's name. Had he still been there; but no, he had returned to fall
in affray in Britany, the victim of Tudor's heartless desertion--this
circumstance had given distinction and honour to the name of Englishmen;
nor did Edmund feel inclined to lower the national character by keeping
away from the scene of glory. What was to be done? York was a mere boy;
yet when Plantagenet spoke of serving under one of the illustrious
Catholic chieftains, York said, "I follow you; I will be your squire,
your page, your stirrup-boy; but I follow!"

In 1489 the siege of Baza was formed. It was defended with desperate
valour by the Moors, while every noble Spaniard capable of bearing arms
assembled in Ferdinand's camp, which glittered in silks and gay
caparisons; yet the very luxury of the warriors was ennobled by their
valour. The sallies on the part of the besieged were furious; the
repulse they sustained, determined and successful. When closely hemmed
in, the Moors relaxed in their desperate efforts. The younger Christian
cavaliers used the leisure so afforded them to unite in making
incursions in the surrounding country, to cut off supplies, and to
surprise the foraging-parties of the enemy. Two youths became
conspicuous in these exploits; both proclaimed their English origin. One
bore a knight's golden spurs (Edmund had been knighted on the eve of the
battle of Stoke by the earl of Lincoln), and boasted of his royal,
though illegitimate, descent; the other, a beardless, fair-haired,
blooming boy, was nameless, save by the Christian appellation of
Ricardo, to which was added the further designation of El Muchacho, from
his extreme youth. It was a lovely yet an awful sight to behold this
pair. The elder, whose dark eyes and dun complexion gave him a greater
resemblance to his southern comrades, never lost sight of his young
friend; side by side, his shield before Richard's breast, they went to
the field. When Edmund would otherwise have pressed forward, he hung
back to guard his cousin; and when the boy was hurried forward in the
ardour of fight, still his kinsman's gaze was on him--his sword
protecting him in every aspect of danger. If the stripling were
attacked, Edmund's eyes flashed fire, and mortal vengeance fell upon his
foe. They became the discourse of the camp; and Plantagenet's modesty,
and Richard's docility in all, save avoiding peril, advanced them still
further in the favour of the grave, courteous Spaniards. "Art thou,
then, motherless?" Isabel asked; "if thou art not, thy gentle parent
must pass many wakeful nights for thee!" At length, in one skirmish,
both the youths got surrounded by the foe. Richard's young arm, wearied
by the very sword he bore, gave ineffectual blows. Forgetting that he
left himself unguarded, Edmund rushed between him and his assailant;
others came to their assistance; but Plantagenet was already struck to
the ground; and for many weeks York forgot even the glorious emulation
of arms, while watching over his best and dearest friend. Meanwhile Baza
surrendered; and the cousins returned to Alcala, to Madeline and her
fair child; and domestic peace succeeded to the storms of war. Richard
loved Madeline as his mother; her daughter was his sister, his angel
sister, whose tenderness and heroism of character commanded deep
affection.

Monina de Faro was, even in childhood, a being to worship and to love.
There was a dreamy sweetness in her countenance, a mystery in the
profound sensibility of her nature, that fascinated beyond all compare.
Her characteristic was not so much the facility of being impressed, as
the excess of the emotion produced by every new idea or feeling. Was she
gay?--her large eyes laughed in their own brightness, her lovely
countenance became radiant with smiles, her thrilling voice was attuned
to lightest mirth, while the gladness that filled her heart overflowed
from her as light does from the sun, imparting to all around a share of
its own essence. Did sorrow oppress her?--dark night fell upon her
mind, clouding her face, oppressing her whole person, which staggered
and bent beneath the freight. Had she been susceptible of the stormier
passions, her subtle and yielding soul would have been their unresisting
victim--but though impetuous--wild--the slave of her own sensations,
her soft bosom could harbour no emotion unallied to goodness: and the
devouring appetite of her soul, was the desire of benefiting all around
her. Her countenance was the mirror of her mind. Its outline resembled
those we see in Spanish pictures, not being quite oval enough for a
northern beauty. It seemed widened at the forehead, to give space for
her large, long eyes, and the canopy of the darkly fringed and veined
lid: her hair was not black, but of a rich sunny chesnut, finer than
carded silk, and more glossy; her skin was delicate, somewhat pale,
except when emotion suffused it with a deep pink. In person, she was not
tall, but softly rounded; and her taper, rosy-tipped fingers, and little
feet, bespoke the delicate proportion that moulded her form to a beauty,
whose every motion awakened admiration and love.

With these companions Richard passed the winter. The following spring
brought war still nearer to the English exiles--Baza had fallen; one of
the kings of Granada, surnamed El Zagal, the Valiant, had submitted to
the Spaniards: and now Ferdinand commanded his former ally, Boabdil el
Chico, to deliver up to him proud Granada, the loved city of the Moors.
Poor Boabdil, whose misfortunes had been prophesied at his birth, and
whose whole career had been such as to affix to him the surname of el
Zogoybi, or the Unfortunate, was roused from his state of opprobrious
vassalage by this demand, and followed up his refusal by an inroad into
the Christian country, near Jaen. Count de Tendilla, a veteran warrior
of high reputation and brilliant exploits, commanded this district. His
headquarters were in the impregnable fortress of Alcala-la-Real itself;
and when the cry came, that the Moors had passed his border, he resolved
to stoop from his eagle's eyrie, and to pounce upon the insolent foe, as
they returned from their incursion. He chose one hundred and fifty men,
and lay in ambush for them. Plantagenet was of the number, and our young
warrior also; though with sage entreaties Edmund, and with tears
Madeline, had besought him to stay. The count succeeded to his
wish--the Moors fell into his toils--few escaped slaughter or capture:
but while the Christian hero exulted in victory, a messenger, pale with
horror, spent with weariness, came to tell that a band of Moors had
taken advantage of his absence, to fall upon Alcala. Indignation and
fury possessed the noble captain; he left half his troop to protect his
spoil, and with the rest, all weary as they were, he hurried back to
Alcala, eager to fall upon the marauders before they should have secured
their prey in a neighbouring fortress. Edmund and Richard were among the
foremost; their rage could only be calmed by the swiftness with which
they returned to deliver or avenge their friends. The sun was sinking in
the west when they arrived at the foot of the Sierra. At first Tendilla
desired that his wearied troop should repose; but several stragglers
among the enemy, perceiving them, gave the alarm to their comrades, who,
laden with booty, were preparing to depart. Harassed as the Christians
were, they had no choice, while their position, on the lower ground,
rendered their attack very disadvantageous. But nothing could check
their fury: with loud cries and flashing weapons they fell upon the
enemy, who, burthened by their prey and wearied by their very outrages,
could ill resist men fighting to avenge their desolated hearths. Still,
so accustomed to war, so innately brave was every soldier on either
side, that the combat was long and sanguinary. Night, the swift-walking
darkness of the nights of the south, came suddenly upon the combatants:
the casques of one party, and the turbans of the other, were scarce
perceptible, to guide the scimitar, or to serve as an aim for the
arquebus. The discomfited Moors, leaving their booty, dispersed along
the defiles, and, forgetful of their prisoners, availed themselves of
the obscurity to make good their flight. Alcala was retaken; and through
the shadows of night, husbands and fathers called aloud on their wives
and children to tell them if they were safe, while many a sound of
woman's wail arose over the corpse of him who had died to save her.

The troop, diminished in number, was drawn up the following morning in
the square of Alcala. "Where," asked the count, "are my two English
soldiers? I saw the elder leading five others across a steep
mountain-path, so as to fall on the enemy's rear; it was a sage measure,
and succeeded well. Ricardo I beheld contending with two bearded Moors,
who held in their fierce grasp a young and fainting girl. I sent Diego
to his rescue: Diego, they say, was slain: night prevented me from
knowing more: have both these strangers fallen? I would pay them a
Spaniard's thanks for their aid--a knight's praise for their
gallantry."

Alas! both thanks and praise would have visited their ears coldly. They
had forgotten Tendilla, his troop, the very Christian cause, in the
overwhelming calamity that had befallen them. Assisted by Diego, who was
cut down in the conflict, Richard had delivered Monina; and, forcing his
way through the enemy, now already scattered, clambered with her in his
arms to their mountain abode: he was guided towards it by the glaring
light of the flames that destroyed it. Meanwhile, the fight still raged;
York placed Monina in safety, and returned to share its perils.

The peace of desolation that came with the morning united the cousins;
and they sought the ruins of their home, and their miserable friend,
whose broken and harrowing tale recorded how Madeline had fallen a
victim to the savage cruelty of the enemy, as she strove to defend her
daughter from impending slavery.

This was the result of Moorish wars--death and misery. Richard's young
heart had bounded to the sound of trump and clarion; and he returned to
hear the melancholy bell that tolled for death. Their very home was in
ruins; but it was long before, amidst deeper woe, they remembered to
lament the destruction of many papers and hoarded objects, the relics
and the testimonies of Richard's royal descent.


[Footnote 1: I had originally entered more at large on a description of
Andalusia, and the history of the conquest of Granada. The subsequent
publication of Mr. Washington Irving's very interesting work has
superseded the necessity of this deviation from the straight path of my
story. Events which, in their romantic detail, were before only to be
found in old Spanish folios, are now accessible to every English reader,
adorned by the elegance of style, and arranged with the exquisite taste,
which characterize the very delightful "Chronicle of the Conquest of
Granada."]




CHAPTER XII

THE CHALLENGE


     Ah! where are they who heard in former hours
     The voice of song in these neglected bowers?
     They are gone!

                                                MOORE.


     The chain is loos'd, the sails are spread,
       The living breath is fresh behind;
     As with dews and sunrise fed,
       Comes the laughing morning wind.

                                               SHELLEY.


This was a gloomy lesson for these young and affectionate beings; they
consoled one another, and wept as they consoled. At first Monina
despaired; her ceaseless laments and unassuaged grief appeared to
undermine her very life; but, when she marked the sorrow she
communicated, when she heard Richard exclaim, "Oh! for spring and
battle, when I may avenge Monina's grief, or die! Death is a thousand
times preferable to the sight of her woe!" and felt that the fate and
happiness of those about her depended on her fortitude: she forced
smiles back to her lips, and again her sweet eyes beamed, undimmed by
tears.

Spring came at last, and with it busy preparation for the siege of
Granada; troop after troop defiled through Alcala, bearing the various
ensigns of the noble commanders; the Count Tendilla, leaving his
mountain nest, united himself to the regal camp before the devoted city;
Isabella joined her royal husband accompanied by her children. Where
women looked on the near face of war, even the timid were inspired to
bear arms. The reputation the English warrior youths had gained forbade
inglorious ease, even had they not aspired with their whole hearts for
renown; yet Plantagenet looked forward with reluctance to the leading
forth his brave, dear cousin to new dangers; divided between pride in
his valour, satisfaction at his thus being schooled to arms, and terror
from the perils to which he would be exposed in a war, on the side of
the enemy, of despair and fury--his thoughtful eyes rested on the young
prince's glowing cheek, his unsullied youth; if wound or fatal hurt
maimed his fair proportion, how should he reply to his widowed mother's
agony? If, snapt like a poor flowret, he fell upon the death-strewn
Vega, what tale should he report to the ardent Yorkists? None! At least
he should be pierced only through him, and Edmund's corse would rampart
his heart, even when he had died to save him.

Thus they again appeared in the Spanish army, and were hailed as among
its ornaments. Whatever desperate enterprise kindled the young Spaniards
to heroic frenzy, found the English pair among their numbers. At the
beginning of the siege, the Moors, few in numbers, and often defeated,
cheated victory of its triumph by various challenges to single combat,
where many a Spaniard fell: their frays resembled, in the splendour of
their armour and their equipments, the stately ceremonial of the
tournaments, but they were deadly in the event. Ferdinand, sure of
victory, and reluctant to expose the noble youth of his kingdom to
needless peril, forbade these duels; and the Moors enraged, multiplied
their insults and their bravadoes, to draw their enemies to the field;
nor lost any opportunity of committing the defence of their beloved city
to the risk of battle, rather than the slow progress of famine. One
memorable engagement took place on occasion of the visit of Queen
Isabella to the hamlet of Zubia, there to obtain a nearer view of
beautiful Granada. The Moors seeing the Spanish troops in array before
their walls, came out to attack them; a battle was fought under the very
eyes of the queen, wherein it was the good fortune of Richard to make so
gallant a figure, that on the very spot the Count Tendilla conferred on
him the honour of knighthood.

Proud was the young duke of York, and eager to paint his maiden shield
with worthy device; he was now nearly eighteen, boyish in aspect, yet
well-knit in person, and accustomed to the fatigue of arms. He no longer
burst on his foes, like an untrained dog, seeking only to slay: there
was forethought in his eye, and a most careful selection of worthy and
valorous opponents. Edmund still was to be found within a javelin's
throw of him; but he no longer feared his untaught rashness, as before
he had done.

In July occurred the conflagration of the Christian camp. The day
following, Ferdinand led forth his troops to make a last ravage among
the gardens and orchards, the emerald girdle of Granada. During the
fray, it was the young duke's chance to throw his javelin so as to slay
on the spot a veteran Moor, whose turban having fallen off, exposed him
thus. His companion in arms, a tall fierce Moslem, rushed forward to
fell the insolent youth; others interposed. Still the Moor kept his eye
upon his boyish foe; a thousand times he threw his dart; twice or thrice
he rushed on him with uplifted scimitar: the battle racked among the
orchard-paths and flowery hedges of the thickly-planted gardens, and
ever some obstruction thwarted the infidel. Plantagenet had marked his
rage and his purpose; he watched him keenly, and the fierce Gomelez
boiled with impatient indignation, as some impediment for ever baffled
his design. His last effort was to fling an arrow, which stuck in the
ground quivering at Richard's feet: a label was affixed--"Dog and
infidel," thus was the cartel worded--"if thou hast courage, meet me at
dawn at the Fountain of Myrtles."

The following morning, at the hour when Plantagenet was wont to see his
cousin, the prince was absent. Noon approached; the troops reposed after
the battle of the day before, or were employed in clearing the dark
ruins of the camp: some thoughtless project might occupy the duke: some
excursion to the other side of Granada. The shades of evening gathered
round the lofty towers, and dimmed the prospect of its Vega: still
Richard came not. Sad, anxious night drew near. Edmund roved through the
camp, questioning, seeking; at last, on the morrow he heard the report,
that the previous evening a cavalier had seen Almoradi Gomelez issue
from a little wood half a league from the city, and ride towards a
postern; that he was galloping up to him, when he saw the Moor totter in
his saddle, and at last fall from his horse; before succour could come,
he died. His last words only spoke of the Fountain of Myrtles; in agony
of spirit, for Gomelez had surely stricken to death his stripling foe,
ere he left the place of combat, Edmund hurried to the spot; the herbage
round the fountain was trampled and torn, as by horses' hoofs. It was
moistened, but not with water; a bank, thickly overgrown with geraniums,
bore the print of a man's form, but none was there.

Monina had been left in Alcala-la-Real, a prey to fear, to gaze from the
steep summit on the plain, whereon, beyond her sight, was acted the real
drama of her life; to question the wounded, or the messengers that
visited Alcala, and to address prayers to the Virgin, were the sad
varieties! of her day. In the midst of this suspense, two unexpected
guests visited her abode--her father, and an Irish chieftain; a
Yorkist, who came to lead the duke from his Spanish abode, to where he
might combat for his lost crown. De Faro had not heard of the death of
Madeline; and with awe his child beheld the tears that bedewed his
rugged checks at this sad termination of his ocean-haunting vision. He
embraced his daughter--"Thou wilt not desert me; we will leave this
fated spot: and thou, Monina, will sail for ever with thy father on the
less barbarous sea."

De Faro's companion was named Lord Barry. He was baron of Buttevant, in
the county of Cork, and allied to the Geraldines, chiefs of that soil.
He had fought at Stoke, and been attainted by Henry; so that he was
forced to wander a banished man. Eager to reinstate himself, every
Yorkist plot numbered him among its warmest partizans. He had for some
time resided either at Paris or at Brussels, where he often held counsel
with Lady Brampton. Weary of delay, he at last stole back to Ireland, to
see whether his noble kinsmen there would abet and rise in favour of the
duke of York. He came away, proud and delighted with his success;
promises of service for the White Rose had been showered on him--his
eloquence and enthusiasm conquered even Lady Brampton. War also seemed
impending between France and England; if that were once declared, every
objection would be obviated. At any rate, the times seemed so fair, that
she agreed with Lord Barry to visit the present home of the young
English prince; and, as if to further their designs. Sir Edward Brampton
was at that moment requested by the Archduke Maximilian to undertake a
private embassy to Lisbon. Thither they had sailed, and now, leaving
this lady in Portugal, Lord Barry had continued his voyage to Andalusia,
with the intention of returning again to Lisbon, accompanied by the
promise and hope of the house of York. He met De Faro in the port of
Malaga: the name was familiar to him. They journeyed together to
Alcala-la-Real.

Lord Barry was all eagerness that the English prince should immediately
join Lady Brampton at Lisbon. It was agreed that they should proceed
thither in De Faro's caravel. The mariner abhorred the name of warfare
between Spaniard and Moor; and Madeline's death only added poignancy to
this sensation. He would not look on the siege of Granada. While the
Irish noble and Monina proceeded to the camp to prepare the cousins, he
returned to Malaga to bring round his vessel to the nearer port of
Almeria. Lord Barry and the fair Moor commenced their journey on the
morning of a most burning day; they wound down the steep declivities of
the Sierra, and entered upon the bright blooming plain. Noon with all
its heat approached. They rested under a grove of mulberries, reposing
by a brook, while Lord Barry's horse and Monina's mule were tied to the
nearest shrubs. Slight accidents are the wires and pullies on which the
machinery of our lives hang. Stung by flies, the noble horse grew
restive, broke his rein, and galloped away; through the thick shade his
master pursued, till tramp of feet and crackling of branches died on
Monina's ear. A quarter of an hour, half an hour passed, when on her
solitude came a Moorish voice, an exclamation in the name of Allah, and
the approach of several men whom already she painted as enemies. To take
to her mule, to ride swiftly through the grove, was the impulse of her
fear; and, when again silence gave her token of security, she found that
she had lost her way. It was only after many vain attempts that she
extricated herself from the wood, and then perceived that she had
wandered from the direct road to Granada, whose high towers were visible
at a distance. The burning July noon-day sun scorched her. Her mule
lagged in his pace. As a last effort, she sought a plantation of elms,
not far distant. The grateful murmur of flowing waters saluted her ears
as she approached. For a few minutes more she was exposed to the glaring
sunshine, and then entered the cool umbrage of the trees--the soft
twilight of woven leaves and branches; a fountain rose in the midst, and
she hastened to refresh herself by sprinkling herself with cool waters.
Thus occupied, she thought she was alone in this sequestered nook, when
a crash among the underwood startled her: the mule snorted aloud, and
from the brake issued a mare caparisoned with saddle and bridle. She had
lost her rider; yet her distended nostrils, the foam that flaked her
sides, the shiver that made her polished skin quiver, spoke of recent
contest or flight. She looked on her--could it be? She called her
"Daraxa," and the animal recognized her voice; while, in answer to the
dreadful surmises that awoke in her heart, a low groan was heard from
the near bank. Turning, she beheld the form of a man lying on the
herbage; not dead, for he groaned again, and then stirred, as if with
returning sense. Quick as lightning, she was at his side; she unlaced
his helmet, nor did she need to look at his pallid countenance to be
assured of what she already knew, that Richard of England lay there, but
for her help, expiring. She filled his helm with water, and sprinkling
it over him, he opened his eyes, and groaning again, strove to clasp his
head with his unnerved hand. With light fairy fingers she released him
from his coat of mail, and saw on his right sight side a mass of
congealed blood, which his faintness had made cease to flow from his
wound, bearing that it would bleed again as he revived, she bound it
with his scarf and her own veil, and then gave him water to drink; after
which he showed still more certain signs of recovery.

It was wonder to him to find himself alive, when already he had believed
the bitterness of death to be passed; still greater wonder was it to
behold his own sweet Monina, like a spirit of good, hovering over to
recover him. He tried to raise himself, and she bent down to support
him, resting his head on her gentle heart; he felt its beating, and
blest her with a thousand soft thanks and endearing names. Though the
wound in his side was deep, yet now that the blood was staunched, it did
not seem dangerous. The immediate cause of his swoon was a stunning blow
on his head, which had beat in the iron of his helm, but inflicted no
further injury. It was long, however, before he could move; and the
evening shades had made it almost night, before he could sit his horse
and slowly quit the wood. Wishing to conduct him to where they might
find succour, Monina directed his steps to a village, east of the grove.
They had hardly ridden half a mile, when Richard felt dizzy; he faintly
called her to his side--she received him as he fell, and, supporting
him to a bank, called aloud in agony, in hopes that some wandering
soldier or peasant might be near to aid them. It happened to her wish;
several countrymen, who had been carrying fruit to the Christian camp,
passed them--she conjured them, in the Virgin's name, to assist a
soldier of the faith, a crusader in their cause. Such an appeal was
sacred in their ears; they contrived, with the poles and baskets in
which they had carried their fruit, covering them with a part of their
habiliments and the saddle-cloths of the animals, to form a sort of
litter, on which they placed Richard. Monina followed on foot, clasping
his hand; the men led the horses: and thus they proceeded up the
mountains to a village about two leagues from Granada, where every house
was open to them. The prince was permitted to repose in the habitation
of the Alcalde, and the deep sleep into which he soon fell was a dear
assurance to his friend's anxious heart, of the absence of danger, and a
promise of speedy recovery.

Yet the night that began so well with the patient, wore a less
prosperous appearance towards the conclusion. Monina sat beside his
couch, and perceived with alarm symptoms of pain and fever. According to
the custom of the time, she had acquired some little skill in surgery;
this, when the wound came to be dressed, made her acquainted with its
irritated and dangerous appearance. As the heat of the day came on, the
prince's sufferings increased. In this little village there was neither
physician nor medicaments necessary for the emergency; and the place
itself, low-built, hedged in by mountains, and inhabited by peasants
only, was ill suited for the patient. She resolved that he should that
night be removed to a town on the eastern side of the mountains,
overlooking the plain bordering the sea. A litter was prepared; and she,
fatigued by her journey, and by long and painful solicitude, yet walked
beside it, listening to his low breathing, catching the smallest sound
he made in complaint or questioning. Before she quitted the village, she
employed a peasant to seek Plantagenet, and convey to him intelligence
of the actual state of his friends.

After three days of fear and anxious care, the wound began to heal, and
Richard became convalescent. Who could tell, during the long hours that
composed those days and nights, the varying emotions that agitated poor
Monina? That he should die, was a thought in which, in its extent and
reality, she never indulged: but an awful fear of what of suffering the
coming hours might produce, never for a moment slept within her. She
spent long intervals of time kneeling by his couch--her soft fingers on
his pulse, counting the rapid vibration--her cool hand alone tempered
the burning of his brow; and often, supported by her, he slept, while
she remained in the same position, immovable. The very pain this
produced was a pleasure to her, since it was endured for him who was the
idol of her innocent and pure thoughts; she almost lamented when he no
longer needed her undivided attention: the hours she gave to repose came
like beggars following in a procession of crowned heads; they were no
longer exalted by being devoted to him.

After the lapse of three anxious days he grew rapidly better, and at
evening-tide enjoyed at the open casement the thrilling sweetness of the
mountain air. How transporting and ineffable are the joys of
convalescence!--the calm of mind--the voluptuous langour--the
unrebuked abandonment to mere pleasurable sensation--the delight that
every natural object imparts, fill those hours with a dream-like, faint
ecstasy, more dear to memory than tumultuous joy. Monina sat near him,
and it was dangerous for their young hearts thus to be united and alone
in a fairy scene of beauty and seclusion. Monina's ardent spirit was
entranced by delight at his recovery: no thought of self mingled with
the single idea that he was saved--saved for youth, for happiness, and
for his long-lost rights. Darkness crept around them, the clumps of
chesnut trees grew more massy and indistinct--the fire-fly was alive
among the defiles of the hills--the bat wheeled round their humble
dwelling--the heavy-winged owl swept with huge flapping wings out of
the copse. "Are ye here?" were the first sounds that broke the silence;
it was the voice of Edmund. Monina sprung up, and glad to disburthen her
full heart, welcomed with an embrace this beloved friend. "Guardian
angel of our lives," he cried; "you are destined at all times to save
us!" Dear, soothing expressions, which then, formed the joy, long
afterwards the master-impulse of her fervent and devoted spirit.

Each told their tale; the one of hazard and mischance, the other of
agonizing inquietude. For Richard, Edmund had feared; but when, wearied,
terrified, and in despair, Lord Barry had brought intelligence of
Monina's disappearance from the streamlet's side where he had left her,
and of a distant view he had caught of Moorish horsemen who took refuge
in Granada--heaven seemed at once to empty on him its direst curses,
and his fate was sealed with misery for ever.

The peasant dispatched by Monina had delayed; not for three days did he
deliver her letter to Plantagenet, who still, trembling in recollection
of his past terror, and what might have been the ultimate event of the
prince's wound, departed on the moment for ----.

And now farewell to Spain! to romantic Spain, to Moorish and Christian
combat, to the gay fields of the Vega, to the sunny mountains of
Andalusia! De Faro's caravel, true to its appointment, arrived at
Almeria. They embarked; their immediate destination was Lisbon; but
their thoughts were fixed on the promised termination of their
wanderings. Soon they would bend their course far away to the islands
of the turbid Northern sea, where nature veils herself in clouds, where
war assumes a sterner aspect, and the very virtues of the inhabitants
grow stubborn and harsh from the struggle they make to be enabled to
bear the physical ills of existence.

Farewell to Spain! to boyhood's feats, to the light coursing of shadows
as he ran a race with the swift-footed hours. A kingdom calls for
Richard! the trials of life attend him, the hope of victory, the
fortitude of well-endured defeat.




CHAPTER XIII

TEMPTATION


     To England, if you will.

                            SHAKSPEARE.


A thousand recollections and forgotten thoughts revived in Richard's
bosom when he saw his childhood's friend, the Lady Brampton. He was
reminded of his sufferings in the Tower, of his noble cousin Lincoln, of
her maternal tenderness, when under her care he quitted the gloomy
fortress, his brother Edward's tomb. His mother's last embrace again
thrilled through his frame, and Lovel's parting blessing; what sad
changes had chanced since last he saw her! Sad in all, but that he, then
a boy, had sprung up into the riper age of youthful prowess.

Even with the banished prince we must recur to the state of affairs in
the north of Europe. The French king, Charles the Eighth, had directed
all his attempts to the subjugation of Britany, which was now under the
dominion of the youthful Anne, its orphan duchess. The English nation
espoused her cause, watched with jealousy and indignation the progress
of the French arms, and clamoured loudly for war in her support. Henry,
on the contrary, was obstinately bent upon peace, though he took
advantage of his subjects' appetite for war, to foist subsidies upon
them, which were no sooner collected than his armaments were disbanded,
and an ambassador, sent on a mission of peace, was substituted for the
herald ready apparelled for defiance. This could not last for ever.
French policy triumphed in the marriage of Charles the Eighth with Anne
of Britany; and that duchy became finally annexed to the crown of
France. England was roused to indignation; the king, forced to listen to
their murmurs, promised to invade the rival kingdom the following
spring; a benevolence was granted him; all his acts tended to the
formation of an expedition, which was the best hope of York.

Lord Barry was urgent against delay, while the English partisans wished
that Richard's landing in Ireland, and Henry's in France, should be
consentaneous. Nay, they had deeper views. Ireland, since Simnel's
defeat, appeared but a forlorn hope, and they fostered the expectation
of being able to make England itself the scene of their first attempt,
so soon as its king should be fairly engaged in hostilities on the other
side of the Channel. The duke himself, eager as he was to begin his
career, warmly supported this project; communication with the North was
slow meanwhile, and months wore away--not fruitlessly. Richard gained
in every way by the delay; his knowledge of English affairs grew
clearer; his judgment formed; his strength, weakened by the events of
the summer, was restored during the repose and salubrious coolness of
the winter months.

Accident furthered their designs; a visitor arrived from England, who
brought with him accounts so encouraging, that hope blossomed into
certainty in the hearts of the warm-hearted followers of York. But ere
we introduce this new and seemingly important personage, we must return
awhile to England, to speak of Henry's suspicions, his fears, his artful
policy.

All that Frion had achieved through his abortive attempt, had been but
to ascertain the existence of the duke of York, and to spread still
wider the momentous secret; so that Henry, suspicious and irritated,
received him on his return with anger, resenting his failure as the
result of treachery. Frion had been dismissed; and now years passed
over, without the occurrence of any circumstances that spoke of the
orphan heir of the English crown. The king brooded over the secret, but
spoke of it to no one. The royal youth grew to his imagination, as in
reality he did, passing from boyhood to almost man's estate. Yet, when
Henry reflected on the undisturbed state he had enjoyed for years, on
the firmness with which he was seated on the throne, and the strong hold
he had acquired through the lapse of time on his subjects' minds, he
sometimes thought that even Richard's friends would advise him to
continue in an obscurity, which was, at least, void of danger.
Nevertheless, whenever there had been a question of attacking France,
the feeling that his rival was ready to come forward, and that, instead
of a war of invasion, he might have to fight for his own crown,
increased his unwillingness to enter on the contest.

Now rumours were afloat--none knew whence they came, from France or
Ireland--of the existence of King Edward's younger son, and that he
would speedily appear to claim his succession. Henry, who was accustomed
to tamper with spies and informers, was yet the last to hear of a
circumstance so nearly affecting his interests. The name of Lady
Brampton at length reached him, as being abroad on a secret and
momentous expedition. This name had made a considerable figure in
Richard Simon's confessions; it was connected with Lincoln, Lovel, the
dowager queen, all whom the Tudor feared and hated. Yet he paused before
he acted; his smallest movement might rouse a torpid foe; he only
increased his vigilance; and, from past experience knowing that to be
the weak point, he dispatched emissaries to Ireland, to learn if any
commotion was threatened, any tale rife there, that required his
interference. As the time approached when it was expected that the
English prince would declare himself, the policy of his friends greatly
changed; and, far from maintaining their former mysterious silence, the
circumstance of his abode in Spain, and the expectation of his speedy
appearance in Ireland, made, during the winter of 1491-92, a principal
topic among such of the native nobility as the earl of Desmond had
interested in his cause. Henry's spies brought him tidings beyond his
fears; and he saw that the struggle was at hand, unless he could arrest
the progress of events. Meanwhile, he continued to defer his war with
France; he felt that would be the signal for his enemy's attack.

As he reflected on these things, a scheme developed itself in his mind,
on which he resolved to act. The enemy was distant, obscure, almost
unknown; were it possible to seize upon his person where he then was, to
prevent his proposed journey to Ireland, to prepare for him an
unsuspected but secure prison--no cloud would remain to mar his
prospect; and, as to the boy himself, he could hope for nothing better
than his cousin Warwick's fate, unless he had preferred, to the
hazardous endeavour of dethroning his rival, a private and innocuous
life in the distant clime where chance had thrown him. This was to be
thought of no more: already he was preparing for the bound, but ere he
made it, he must be crushed for ever.

In those times, when recent civil war had exasperated the minds of men
one against the other, it was no difficult thing for a Lancastrian king
to find an instrument willing and fitting to work injury against a
Yorkist. During Henry's exile in Brittany, he had become acquainted with
a man, who had resorted to him there for the sole purpose of exciting
him against Richard the Third! he had been a favourite page of Henry the
Sixth, he had waited on his son, Edward, prince of Wales, that noble
youth whose early years promised every talent and virtue; he had
idolized the heroic and unhappy Queen Margaret. Henry died a foul death
in the Tower; the gracious Edward was stabbed at Tewkesbury; the royal
Margaret had given place to the widow Woodville; while, through the
broad lands of England, the sons of York rioted in the full possession
of her wealth. Meiler Trangmar felt every success of theirs as a
poisoned arrow in his flesh--he hated them, as the mother may hate the
tiger whose tusks are red with the life-blood of her first-born--he
hated them, not with the measured aversion of a warlike foe, but the
dark frantic vehemence of a wild beast deprived of its young. He had
been the father of three sons; the first had died at Prince Edward's
feet, ere he was taken prisoner; another lost his head on the scaffold;
the third--the boy had been nurtured in hate, bred amid dire curses and
bitter imprecations, all levelled against Edward the Fourth and his
brothers--his mind had become distorted by the ill food that nurtured
it--he brooded over the crimes of these men, till he believed that he
should do a good deed in immolating them to the ghosts of the murdered
Lancastrians. He attempted the life of the king--was seized--tortured
to discover his accomplices: he was tortured, and the father heard his
cries beneath the dread instrument, to which death came as a sweet
release. Real madness for a time possessed the unhappy man, and when
reason returned, it was only the dawn of a tempestuous day, which rises
on the wrecks of a gallant fleet and its crew, strewn on the dashing
waves of a stormy sea. He dedicated himself to revenge; he had sought
Henry in Brittany; he had fought at Bosworth, and at Stoke. The success
of his cause, and the peace that followed, was at first a triumph, at
last almost a pain to him. He was haunted by memories which pursued him
like the hell-born Eumenides; often he uttered piercing shrieks, as the
scenes, so pregnant with horror, recurred too vividly to his mind. The
priests, to whom he had recourse as his soul's physicians, counselled
him the church's discipline; he assumed the Franciscan habit, but found
sackcloth and ashes no refuge from the greater torture of his mind. This
man, in various ways, had been recalled to Henry's mind, and now he
selected him to effect his purpose.

To any other he would have feared to intrust the whole secret; but the
knowledge that the destined victim was the son and rightful heir of King
Edward, would add to his zealous endeavours to crush him. Besides that
Trangmar had a knowledge of the fact, from having been before employed
to extract in his priestly character this secret from a Yorkist, Sir
George Neville, who had been intrusted by Sir Thomas Broughton. Everything
yielded in this wretch's mind to his hatred of York; and he scrupled not
to hazard his soul, and betray the secrets of the confessional. Neville
fortunately was informed in time of the danger that menaced him, and had
fled; while Trangmar, thunderstruck by the magnitude of his discovery,
hastened to reveal it to the king. It were long to detail each act of
the crafty sovereign, and his scarcely human tool. By his order, the
friar introduced himself to the dowager queen, at Bermondsey, with a
plausible tale, to which she, in spite of her caution, was induced to
give ear, and intrusted a message by him, as he said that he was on his
way to Spain, to seek and exhort to action the dilatory prince. He then
departed. Henry had rather to restrain than urge his furious zeal. The
scheme projected was, that Richard should be entrapped on board a
vessel, and brought with secrecy and speed to England, where he might be
immured for life in some obscure castle in Wales. Trangmar promised that
either he would accomplish this, or that the boy should find a still
more secret prison, whence he could never emerge to disturb the reign of
Henry, or put in jeopardy the inheritance of his son.

Such was the man who, in the month of April, 1492, following Lady
Brampton's steps, arrived at Lisbon, and found to his wish the prince
there also, and easy access afforded him to his most secret counsels. He
brought letters from the dowager queen, and some forged ones from other
partisans of York, inviting the prince, without application to any
foreign sovereigns, or aid from distant provinces, at once to repair to
England, and to set up his standard in the midst of his native land,
where, so these letters asserted, the earl of Surrey and many other
powerful lords anxiously awaited him. All this accorded too well with
the wishes of the little conclave not to insure assent; nay, more, when
Trangmar urged the inexpediency of the duke's being accompanied by such
notorious Yorkists as Plantagenet and Lady Brampton, it was suddenly
agreed that Richard should embark on board a merchantman, to sail with
the next fair wind for England, while his friends dispersed themselves
variously for his benefit. De Faro, in his caravel, was to convey Lord
Barry to Cork. Plantagenet resolved to visit the duchess of Burgundy, at
Brussels. Lady Brampton departed for the court of France, to engage the
king at once to admit young Richard's claim, and aid him to make it
good. "You, sweet, will bear me company;" and Monina, her whole
soul--and her eyes expressed that soul's devotion to Richard's
success--remembered, starting, that the result of these consultations
was to separate her from her childhood's companion, perhaps, for ever.
As if she had tottered on the brink of a precipice, she shuddered; but
all was well again. It was not to be divided from the prince, to remain
with Lady Brampton, to proceed to Paris with her; on his earliest
triumph to make a part of it, and to join his court in London. All these
words, king, victory, and court, wove a golden tissue before the ardent
girl's eyes; she had not yet


     "Lifted the painted veil which men call life;"


as a child who chases the glories of the west, she knew not that night
was falling upon her, while still she fancied that she advanced towards
the ever-retreating splendour of the sky.

Lady Brampton and Plantagenet trembled, as they committed their beloved
charge to other hands; they importuned Trangmar with their
injunctions--their entreaties, their thousand last words of care and
love--the friar heard, and smiled assent to all. Monina had need of all
her courage for the hour, which she knew not that she dreaded till it
came. He was going; the truth flashed suddenly upon her--he, from whom
since childhood she had scarcely been absent for a day. So blind had she
been to her own sensations, that it was not until he leaped into the
boat, and put off from shore, that she became aware of the overwhelming
tide of grief, disquiet, almost of despair, that inundated her heart.
Where was her gaiety, her light, ethereal spirit flown? Why lagged the
hours thus? Why did ceaseless reverie seem her only refuge from
intolerable wretchedness?

She had one other solace; she was still with his friends, whose whole
thoughts were spent upon him; his name enriched their discourse; the
chances of his voyage occupied their attention. Little knew they the
strange and tragic drama that was acting on board the skiff that bore
afar the idol of their hopes.




CHAPTER XIV

THE TRAITOR PUNISHED


     This friar boasteth that he knoweth hell,
     And God it wot that is but litel wonder;
     Friars and fiends ben but litel asonder.

                                          CHAUCER.


Richard meanwhile sailed fearlessly, with treachery for his nearest
mate. Trangmar had at once exhibited audacity and prudence in the
arrangement of his plan. He had made no great preparation, nor confided
to any the real object of his intents. His only care had been, that the
duke should sail on board an English vessel; and chance had brought into
the Tagus one whose captain was inclined to the party of Lancaster. He
also contrived to have two hirelings of his own engaged on board as part
of the crew, who knew that it was their employer's design to carry to
England a prisoner for the king. He was besides provided with a warrant
from Henry, empowering him to seize on his rebel subject--the name a
blank, for the monk to fill up--alive or dead. The paper ran thus; so,
in case of struggle, to afford warranty for his darker purpose.

Richard was now a prisoner. The vessel belonging to any country is a
portion of that country; and the deck of this merchantman was virtually
a part of the British soil. The prince, not heeding his position, was so
far from fearing his enemy's power, that he felt glad to find himself
among his countrymen. He looked on the weather-beaten countenances of
the honest sailors, and believed that he should find friends and
partisans in all. He spoke to Trangmar of his purpose of declaring
himself, and gaining them over; making this tiny offshoot of wide
England his first conquest. Trangmar had not anticipated this. He was
ignorant of the versatile and active spirit of the youth with whom he
had to deal; nor had he, by putting himself in imagination in the
prince's place, become aware how the project of acquiring his own was
his sleepless incentive to every action, and how he saw in every event a
stepping-stone in the prosecution of his enterprise. He started at the
proposal, and in his own heart said, "I must lose no time; that which I
thought to do next week, were better done to-morrow." With Richard he
argued against this measure: he showed how the captain was bound to the
present English government by his fortunes; how far more likely it was
that, instead of gaining him and his crew, he would be made a prisoner
by them, and delivered up to his enemy. Richard lent no great credence
to this, but he yielded to the authority of the elder and the priest.

It was not in the power of his wily adversary to prevent him from
ingratiating himself in the hearts of all around him. Besides his
gentleness, his unaffected sympathy, and noble demeanour, his gay and
buoyant spirit was congenial to the reckless sailors, who, during the
dead calm that succeeded their first day's sail after quitting the
Tagus, were glad of amusement to diversify their monotonous lives. He
interceded with their captain when any fault was committed; he learned
their private histories, promised his assistance, and scattered money
among them. Sometimes he called them around him to teach him their art,
discoursing about the stars, the magnet, the signs of the weather; he
climbed the shrouds, handled the ropes, became an adept in their
nautical language. At other times he listened to tales of dreadful
shipwrecks and sailors' hardships, and recounted in turn De Faro's
adventures. This made them talk of the new African discoveries, and
descant on the wild chimeras or sage conclusions of Columbus, who at
last, it was said, was to be sent by the sovereigns of Spain in quest of
the western passage to India, over the slant and boundless Atlantic. All
this time, with flapping sails, they lay but a short distance off the
mouth of the Tagus; and Trangmar, impatient of delay, yet found it
prudent to postpone his nefarious purpose.

After the calm had continued for nearly a week, signs of bad weather
manifested themselves; squalls assailed the ship, settling at last in a
gale, which grew into a tempest. Their little vessel was decked, yet
hardly able to resist the lashing waves of the Bay of Biscay. A leak,
which had shown itself even during the calm, increased frightfully; the
men were day and night employed at the pumps, exposed to the beating
rain, and to the waves, which perpetually washed the deck, drenching
their clothes and bedding; each hour the wind became more furious, dark
water-spouts dipping into the boiling sea, and churning it to fury,
swept past them, and the steep sides of the mountain-high billows were
ready at every moment to overwhelm them. Their tiny bark, which in these
days would scarcely receive a more dignified name than a skiff, was
borne as a leaf on the stream of the wind, its only safety consisting in
yielding to its violence. Often at the worst the men despaired. The
captain himself, frightened at the danger--and, strange inconsistency,
still more fearful of the ruin that must attend him if his vessel were
wrecked--lost all presence of mind. The prince displayed, meanwhile,
all his native energy; he commanded the men, and they obeyed him,
looking on him as a superior being; when, by following his orders, the
progress of the leak was checked, and the tossed bark laboured less
among the surges. "Sailors have short prayers," he said; "but if they
are sincere ones, the saints will not the less intercede for us before
God. Join me, my men, in a pious vow. I swear, by our Lady's precious
name, to walk barefoot to her nearest shrine the first land we touch,
and there to make a gift of incense and candles at her altar. This, if
we escape; if not, here is Father Meiler, a holy Franciscan, to give us
short shrift; so that, like devout Catholics, we may recommend our souls
to the mercy of Jesus. And now to the pump, the ropes; bring me a
hatchet--our mast must overboard."

Three days and nights they worked unremittingly; the lull that then
succeeded was followed by another tempest, and the exhausted mariners
grew desperate. They had been borne far into the Atlantic, and now the
wind shifting, drove them with the same fury into the Bay of Biscay.
Every moment in expectation of death, the heart of Trangmar softened
towards his victim in spite of himself; he was forced to admire his
presence of mind, his unvanquishable courage; his light, yet gentle
spirit, which made him bear up under every difficulty, yet pity those
who sunk beneath, cheering them with accents at once replete with
kindness and fearless submission to the decree of Providence. Feeling
the crew bound to him as his natural subjects, he extended towards them
a paternal love, and felt called upon to guard and save them. After, for
a fortnight, they had thus been the sport of the elements, the gale
decreased; the violent breakers subsided into one long swell, which bore
them into a sheltered cove, in the wild coast that surrounds the Bay of
Biscay. The men disembarked, the vessel was drawn up; all hands were
employed in unlading and repairing her. "Ye do ill," said Richard; "do
you not remember our vow? Doubtless some village is near which contains
a shrine where we may pay it."

This piety was in accord with the spirit of the times; and the men,
rebuked, revered still more the youth who had saved them in danger, and
who now in safety paid, with religious zeal, the debt incurred towards
their heavenly patroness. A little village lay secluded near the creek,
and above it, on a high rock, was a chapel dedicated to Saint Mary of
the Ascension, erected by a noble, who had vowed such offering on
escaping, as the prince of England had, from death on those perilous
seas. Bareheaded, barefooted, bearing lights, following the Franciscan
who led the way, the crew of the St. George proceeded towards the
shrine. Next to the Blessed Virgin, Richard claimed their gratitude; and
after due Aves had been said at the altar, still in the sacred place
they gathered round him, offering their property and their lives,
imploring him to accept from them some pledge of their thankfulness. The
heart of the outcast sovereign swelled within him. "I reign here, in
their breasts I reign," was the thought that filled his bright eyes with
a dew springing from the fulness of his soul. With a smile of triumph he
looked towards Father Meiler, as if to appeal to his judgment, whether
now he might not declare himself, and claim these men's allegiance. He
was startled by the dark and even ferocious expression of Trangmar's
countenance. His coarse brown Franciscan dress, belted in by a rope; the
cowl thrown back, displaying the monkish tonsure; the naked feet: these
were symbols of humility and Christian virtue, in strong contrast with
the deep lines of his face, and the glare of his savage eyes. He met the
glance of his victim, and became confused, while the prince in wonder
hastened to ask what strange thoughts occupied him, painting his visage
with every sign of fierce passion.

"I was thinking," said Trangmar, hesitating; "I was deliberating, since
God has cast us back on the land, whether it were not wiser to continue
our journey through France, bidding farewell to the perils of the ocean
sea?"

"That will I not," cried the prince. "Father Meiler, I watched you
during the storm; you acted no coward's part then; why do you now?"

"When danger is near, I can meet it as a man of courage," said Trangmar;
"when it is far, I can avoid it like a prudent one."

"A good clerical distinction, fit for a monk," replied the duke; "but I,
who am a cavalier, father, love rather to meet danger, than to avoid it
like a woman or a priest."

"Insulting boy!" cried Meiler; "dare you taunt me with cowardice? That I
was a soldier ere I was a monk, some of your race dearly rued!"

Before these words were fully uttered, Trangmar recollected himself; his
voice died away, so that his last expression was inaudible. The duke
only beheld his burst of passion and sudden suppression of it, and said
gently, "Pardon me, father; it is my fault that you forgot the respect
due to me. I forgot the reverence meet from youth to age--most meet
from a sinful boy to a holy monk."

"I thank your highness," said the friar, "for recalling to my memory a
truth that had half escaped it. Henceforth be assured that I will not
forget that you are the undoubted offspring of the earl of March--of
Edward of England."

Fate thus urged this wicked and miserable man to his fiend-like purpose.
Awakened again to deadly vengeance, he resolved to delay no longer; to
trust no more to chance: he saw now all the difficulties of his former
scheme of taking his enemy a prisoner to England; and this soothed his
conscience as he recurred to more fatal designs. During the short delay
that intervened before they again put out to sea, he watched an
opportunity, but found none. At length they weighed anchor; and with a
favourable wind, bore down the coast of France. The time was come, he
surely thought: for during this long voyage he could frame an
opportunity; during some dark night, when the ship sailed cheerily
before a fair breeze, he would engage the prince in engrossing talk
concerning the conduct he should pursue when in England, taking
advantage of his victim's incautiousness to allure him near the brink,
and then push him overboard. His single strength was more than a match
for his slight adversary; but to render his scheme doubly sure, he would
have the two men in his pay near him, to assist, in the case of
struggle, and vouch for his innocence if he were accused of foul play.

It is the fortune of those hurried into crime by violent passion, that
they can seldom find accomplices as wicked as themselves. Thus was it
with Trangmar. The men whose assistance he relied upon, the enthusiasm
of their fellow-sailors for their noble passenger. After they had again
set sail, the wind blowing gently from the south, bore them onwards with
a favourable navigation, till, shifting a few points eastward, it began
to freshen. It was then that the Franciscan, not wholly betraying his
purpose, but hinting that their presence would be necessary, ordered his
men to contrive that the rest of the crew should be below, and they near
at hand, while he that night should be alone with Richard upon deck. One
of the men replied by stoutly declaring that if any evil was threatened
the prince, he would not be a party in it. "You possess King Henry's
warrant," he said, "to make this Fitzroy a prisoner. I will not oppose
his majesty's command. You have him safely; what would you more?"

The other apparently yielded an assent to his employer's commands, and
then found a speedy opportunity to warn Richard of his danger A veil
fell from the prince's eyes. "Surely I knew this before," he thought;
"ever since I was in Saint Mary's Chapel, I must have known that this
dastard monk was my enemy. I am indeed betrayed, alone, friendless, on
board an English vessel, surrounded by an English crew. Now let the
trial be made, whether simple honesty be not of more avail than cruelty
and craft. But first let me fathom the full intention of this man, and
learn whether he have a worse design than that of delivering me over
defenceless to my adversary. It cannot be that he would really murder
me."

The breeze had rather sunk towards sunset, but it arose again with the
stars; the vessel's prow struck against the light waves, and danced
gaily on through the sea. One man stood at the helm; another, one of the
friar's hirelings, loitered near; the other kept out of the way. Still,
beneath the thousand stars of cloudless night, the little bark hurried
on, feeling the freshening of the wind; her larboard beam was deep in
the water, and close at the deck's leeward edge, Meiler and his intended
victim paced. One thoughtless boy, high among the shrouds, whistled in
answer to the winds. There was at once solitude and activity in the
scene. "This is the hour," thought Richard; "surely if man's sinful
heart was ever touched with remorse, this man's may now. God's throne,
visible in all its beauty above us--beneath, around, the awful roaring
waters, from which we lately so miraculously escaped." He began to speak
of England, of his mother, of the hopes held out to him by his
companion; eager in his desire of winning a traitor to the cause of
truth, he half forgot himself, and then started to find that, ever as he
walked, his companion got him nearer to the brink of the slant, slippery
deck. Seized with horror at this manifestation of the worst designs, yet
scarcely daring to credit his suspicions, he suddenly stopped, seizing a
rope that swung near, and steadying himself by winding his arm round it,
an act that escaped his enemy's observation, for, as he did it, he
spoke: "Do you know, Father Meiler, that I suspect and fear you? I am an
inexperienced youth, and if I am wrong, forgive me; but you have changed
towards me of late, from the kind friend you once were. Strange doubts
have been whispered: do you reply to them. Are you my friend, or are you
a treacherous spy?--the agent of the noble Yorkists, or Henry Tudor's
hireling murderer?"

As he spoke, the friar drew still nearer, and the prince recoiled
farther from him: he got on the sheer edge of the deck. "Rash boy!"
cried Trangmar, "know that I am no hireling: sacred vengeance pricks me
on! Son of the murderer! tell me, where is sainted Henry? where Prince
Edward? where all the noble martyrs of his cause? where my brave and
lost sons? There, even where thou shalt be: quick, look back, thy grave
yawns for thee!"

With the words he threw himself furiously on the prince: the stripling
sprung back with all the force lent him by the rope he held, and pushed
at the same time Trangmar violently from him, as he cried aloud on the
sailors, "What, ho! treason is among us!" A heavy splash of the falling
Meiler answered his call: the strong man was cast down in his very
pride; the waters divided, and sucked him in. In a moment the crew were
on deck; Trangmar's hireling, scared, cried out, "He is King Henry's
prisoner! seize him!" thus increasing the confusion. The friar, his
garments floating, now appeared struggling among the waves; a rope was
thrown to him; the vessel sped on meanwhile, and it fell far short;
Richard, horror-struck, would have leapt in to save his enemy; but the
time was gone. One loud shriek burst on the ear of night, and all was
still; Trangmar, his misery, his vengeance, and his crimes, lay buried
in the ocean's hoary caves.

What explanation could follow this tremendous incident? The prince spoke
of his life attacked; the men of the warrant their master had for his
seizure: what was his crime none knew. "That will I declare freely,"
said the royal youth; "that unhappy man has sealed my truth by his
death. In my childhood I was nurtured in a palace, and bore the title of
the duke of York. Edward the Fourth was my father, Edward the Fifth my
brother."

"Why this is foulest treason," cried the trembling captain.

"Ay, or fairest loyalty; speak, my friends; which of you will lay hands
on your liege, on Richard the Fourth of England?"

The reckless and ignorant sailors, riotously and with one acclaim, swore
to die for him; but their commander shuddered at the peril that beset
him: while his men were hanging round their idolized prince, he retired
with his mate to lament the ugly chance of Trangmar's death, and to
express terror at the very name of York. If the captain was a
coward-friend of Tudor, the mate was a sturdy Lancastrian; he
recommended his chief to seize the boy, and convey him a welcome gift to
his sovereign; the clamours of the delighted crew showed that this was
vain advice. He had said to them, with all the ingenuousness of youth,
"My life is in your hands, and I know that it is safe." Yet, when they
spoke of seizing their unwilling commander, and of delivering the vessel
in his hands, he said, "My good friends, I will not make lawless acts
the stepping-stones to my throne; it is grief enough for me that my
young hands have unwittingly destroyed the life of one who, not as an
armed knight, but in holy garb set himself against me. I myself will
persuade your captain to do me all the service I require."

This poor man was willing enough to hear what he called reason; at first
he would fain have entreated Richard to suffer himself to be carried a
prisoner to England; and, when he found his discourse vain, he yielded
timid obedience to York's wishes, in spite of the lowering brow of his
mate: thus, at least, his cargo would be saved, and his crew preserved
from mutiny. Richard simply requested to be set on shore in Cork
harbour, suddenly relinquishing every thought of England, now that he
saw the treachery that awaited him there, and recurring to the former
plans of Lord Barry. In Ireland, in the county of the Desmonds, he
should find friends, adherents, almost prepared for his arrival; and
there also, if Barry forgot not his promise, this stanch partisan would
speedily join him: the captain gladly assented to any project that did
not force him to land this dangerous pretender on the English shores.

For one week they ran before the wind; and Ireland, far and low, was
discernible on the horizon; the dear land of promise to the weary exile,
the betrayed, but high-hearted prince: during this short navigation it
had required all his fortitude to banish from his mind the image of the
friar struggling in the waves, of a man precipitated in the very act of
crime "unhouseled, unanointed, unannealed," into the life-quenching
waters. Besides all other expectations, Richard longed to get on shore,
that in a confessional he might lift this burthen of involuntary guilt
from his soul.

At length the iron-bound coast was right ahead; the ponderous rocky jaws
of the creek were open, and they sailed up Passage, past beautiful and
woody islands, under forest-crowned hills, till they cast anchor before
the picturesque and hill-set city of Cork, whose quay was crowded by
multitudes, gazing on the newly-arrived vessel.

The duke of York stood on the prow of his skiff, reflecting on the first
step he ought to take. He knew little of Ireland, and that little had
been gleaned from Lord Barry: he heard from him of its warlike chiefs,
its uncivilized septs, and English settlers, scarce less wild, and quite
as warlike as its aboriginal inhabitants. He called to mind the names
most familiar to him--the earl of Kildare, abettor of Simnel, pardoned
by Henry, and continued in his office of Lord Deputy; the earl of
Desmond, whom Lord Barry had particularly interested in his favour, who
affected the state of an Irish chieftain, or rather king, and who, in
his remote abode in Munster, disdained to attend the Dublin parliament,
or to make one of the lawful governors of the land. Other names he
remembered of less note: Plunket, the lord chief justice, whom, with
infinite reluctance, Henry had pardoned; Keating, prior of Kilmainham,
who had been constable of Dublin Castle, and who, ejected from his
office after the battle of Stoke, had saved himself by flight, and was
now concealed in an abbey near Buttevant. Much, however, of what he had
heard, escaped his memory; and he stood on the threshold of this unknown
land, vainly seeking in his recollection for the dim and shadowy forms
which were to guide him in the new and unexplored world before him.
Another reflection also presented itself: Lord Barry had quitted Ireland
the year before, and communication there had been none since then--Was
Kildare still deputy? did incursions of the natives, or turbulence among
themselves, occupy the lords of the Pale? Should he find a band of
nobles and their followers ready to assist him, or the motley population
of a barbarous wild, whose sole ideas were internal struggles for power,
whose watchwords for enterprise were names and things in which he had no
portion?

In a hurried manner, York resolved on his plan of action. He had, on
their approach to land, arrayed himself in gay and rich apparel. The
Spain from which he came was parent of this act: there embroidery,
housings inlaid with gold, and arms encrusted with jewels, formed the
pride of the high-born cavaliers. He stood prepared to land; he thanked
the captain for his enforced courtesy; he held out his hand to the crew,
who gathered round him with their prayers and blessings. "My own!" was
his first thought as he set his foot on shore: "Hail, realm of my
fathers! Hear the vow of the fugitive who claims your sway! Justice,
mercy, and paternal love, are the gifts with which I will repay your
obedience to my call; your submission to my rule."

"Heave the anchor, and away!" thus spoke the captain of the craft he had
left.

"For England; to warn our king of this springal's insolent presumption,"
said the mate.

"To any quarter of the wide world, save England," replied the timid
captain: "Would you have me run my neck into the noose for not having
clapped under hatches this mercurial spark? Master mate, learn from an
old sailor, that the best you can do with kings and grandees, is to have
nought to do with them."




CHAPTER XV

THE LANDING AT CORK


       Then Paridell, in whom a kindly pride
       Of gracious speech, and skill his words to frame
       Abounded, being glad of so fit tide
     Him to commend to them, thus spake, of all well eyed.

                                                        SPENSER.


Cork was an asylum for civilization in the centre of a savage district.
The cautious burghers, made wealthy by trade, and ever in fear of
incursions from the surrounding septs, kept the strictest guard upon
their city, as if they had a continual siege laid to it. They forbade
all intercourse or intermarriage between those within and without the
walls, till every citizen became linked together by some sort of
kindred. It is true, that the country around was peopled to a great
degree by English lords; but they were the degenerate English, as they
were styled, who imitated the state and independence of the native
chiefs. Such was the earl of Desmond, of the family of the Geraldines,
who ruled as a king over Munster, and with whom the Barrys, the De
Courcys, the Barrets, and the Mac Carthys, Mac Swineys, and other native
chiefs, were connected by marriage, or struggling with him for
"chieferie" in the mutable chance of war.

There was no appearance of timidity in the frank and assured aspect of
the unfriended adventurer, as, without entering the city, but merely
passing through its suburbs, he proceeded to the cathedral church. It
was twelve o'clock on the 24th of June, the feast of Saint John the
Baptist; and high mass was celebrating. The duke of York entered the
church--his soul was filled with pious gratitude for his escape from
the dangers of the sea, and the craft of his enemies; and, as he knelt,
he made a vow to his sainted patroness, the Virgin, to erect a church on
the height which first met his eyes as he approached shore, and to endow
a foundation of Franciscans--partly, because of all monkish orders they
chiefly venerate her name, partly to atone for his involuntary crime in
the death of Meiler Trangmar, who wore that habit. The appearance of
this young, silken-suited, and handsome cavalier, drew the eyes of
Erin's blue-eyed daughters:--the men whispered together that he must be
some Spanish grandee or English noble; but wherefore, unannounced and
unattended, he came and knelt in their church before the shrine of Saint
Finbar, was matter of vague conjecture. The congregation passed out;
then, impelled by curiosity, formed a wide semicircle round the gates of
the cathedral, watching the motions of the graceful stranger. Master
John Lavallan, the mayor, John O'Water, the wealthiest citizen, and
former mayor of the town, and other rich burghers, stood close to the
Round Tower within the walls of the Garth, in expectation of being
addressed by their distinguished visitor. The duke of York cast a quick
glance around; and then, as the mayor advanced, the youth stepped
forward to meet him. The citizen, as one habituated to exercise
hospitality, bade the knight welcome, beseeching him to honour his abode
with his presence, and to command his services. The duke frankly
accepted the invitation, and descended with the mayor into the main
street, where that officer resided; and here again Richard was made
welcome to the city of Cork.

It was a gala day at the mayor's; and now, at the dinner hour, twelve
o'clock, the long tables groaned under the weight of viands, and round
the hospitable board were seated the principal families of the town. No
questions were asked the visitor--his golden spurs bespoke his
honourable rank; he was placed at the right hand of Lavallan; and, while
the clatter of knives and trenchers went on, he was only remarked by the
younger guests, who gazed, even to the injury of their appetites, on his
burnished ringlets, his fair open brow, his bright blue eyes, and smile
of courteous affability: but time went on; the dishes were carried away,
the goblets placed; when the mayor, rising, drank welcome to the
stranger, and asked, if no reason forbade him to reply, his name and
mission. Already Richard had become acquainted with most of the
countenances of his entertainers--that is, of those nearest him; for,
far through the long hall, almost out of sight, the table extended,
crowded by city retainers, and a few of the mere "Irishry," whose long
hair and loose saffron-coloured mantles contrasted with the doublet,
hose, and trimmed locks of the townsmen. Those near him bore the latter
character, though their vivacious glances and quick gestures were more
akin to the inhabitants of the south, among whom he had been accustomed
to live, than to the steady, dull demeanour of English traders.

When Lavallan drank to the stranger, every eye turned to the object of
the toast, Richard arose--his plumed cap was doffed; his shining hair,
parted on his brow, clustered round his throat; his sunny countenance
was full of confidence and courage--"Sir Mayor," he said, "my most kind
entertainer, and you, my friends, men of Cork, may the grateful thanks
of the homeless adventurer be as kindly received by you, as they are
gladly paid by him. Who am I? you ask. Wherefore do I come? My name is
the best in the land; my coming is to claim your aid, to elevate it to
its rightful place of pride and honour. Were I craven-hearted, or you
less generous, I might dread to declare myself; but fear never entered
the heart of a Plantagenet; and, when, unreservedly, I place my life in
your hands, will you betray the trust?"

A murmur quickly hushed, the sound of suppressed emotion, as the winds
of thought passed over the minds of those around, for an instant
interrupted the speaker--

"Neither is my name nor lineage unknown to you," he continued: "you
honour both and have obeyed them; will you refuse to submit to me, their
descendant and representative? Did you not vow fealty to Richard duke of
York, who, driven from his own England by false Lancaster, found refuge
and succour here? Was not Clarence your ruler, and Edward of England
monarch of your isle? In the name of these, in the name of the White
Rose and Mortimer and Plantagenet--I, the son of Edward the Fourth, the
victim of my uncle Gloster's treachery, and low-born Tudor's usurpation;
I, named in my childhood duke of York and lord of Ireland, now, if
rightly styled, Richard the Fourth of England, demand my lieges of Cork
to acknowledge my rights, to rise in my cause. I, a prince and an
outcast, place myself in their hands, through them to be a fugitive for
ever, or a king."

Had Richard planted this scene, with deep insight into the dispositions
of those with whom he had to deal, he could not have projected a better
arrangement. They had learned of his existence from Lord Barry, and were
prepossessed in his favour. Their fiery hearts were lighted at the
word--his name, with a thousand blessings attached to it, rang through
the hall: by means of the servants and followers at the lower end of the
table, it reached the outer apartments and avenues of the mansion-house;
while, with a kind of exalted rapture, the mayor and his guests hung
over their new-found prince. The citizens began to gather without, and
to call aloud for the White Rose of England; the day was finished in
festal tumult; the mayor led forth his princely visitor--he was hailed
lord of Ireland with one acclaim. Some elders, who had known his
grandfather, or had been followers of the duke of Clarence, and others
who, visiting England, had seen Edward the Fourth were struck by the
likeness he bore to his progenitors, and enthusiastically touched for
his truth. To see and hear the mad exultation of the moment, an
uninterested spectator must have thought that a messenger from heaven
had arrived, to bestow liberty on the groaning slaves of some
blood-nurtured tyrant. The duke was installed in the castle with
princely state, a town-guard appointed him, and the night was far
advanced, before he was permitted to repose, and wondering to collect
his thoughts, and feel himself an acknowledged sovereign in the first
town of his alienated dominions in which he had set foot.

The morrow brought no diminution to the zeal of his partizans. The first
measure of the day was his attending high mass, surrounded by the mayor
and citizens; when the holy ceremony was finished, he took oath on the
Gospels, that he was the man he had declared himself. The eager people
clamoured for him to assume the name of king; but that he said he would
win with his good sword, nor, till he possessed its appanage, assume a
barren title: he was the duke of York, until at Westminster he received
his paternal crown.

From the church the mayor and citizens attended his council at the
Castle, and here Richard more fully explained to them the projects of
Lord Barry, his hopes from the earl of Desmond, and his wish to attach
to his cause the earl of Kildare, Lord Deputy of Ireland. He learned the
changes that had taken place but a month or two before: some suspicion
having entered Henry's mind, the earl of Kildare had been dismissed from
his high office, and Walter, archbishop of Dublin, substituted in his
room. The baron of Portlester, who had been treasurer for forty years,
was obliged to resign in favour of a Butler, hereditary and bitter
enemies of the Geraldines, while the exaltation of Plunket, from the
office of chief justice to that of chancellor, only proved that he was
entirely gained over to the Lancastrians. The acts of this new
government tended to mortify the late deputy, who bore ill his own
degradation and the triumph of his enemies. On various occasions brawls
had ensued; and when Sir James of Ormond wished to place a creature of
his own in a castle over which Kildare claimed seignory, the latter
defended it by arms. This turbulent state of things promised fair for
the adventurer: and his first deed was to despatch letters to the earls
of Kildare and Desmond, soliciting their assistance, setting forth the
ready zeal of the city of Cork, and the promises and attachment of Lord
Barry, whom he daily expected to see arrive.

In all that the English prince did, nothing spoke louder for him to his
Irish friends than his fearless confidence, and artless, yet not
undignified reliance on their counsels. He had gained a warm friend in
the former mayor, O'Water, a man reverenced throughout Munster. In his
youth he had served in the army, and his spirit was hardly yet tamed to
the pacific habits of a burgher. He was sixty years of age; but he bore
his years lightly, and remembered but as the occurrence of yesterday the
time when the duke of York, grandfather of young Richard, was lord of
Ireland. He had attached himself particularly to his person, and
followed him to England, returning to his own country after his patron's
death. He saw in the descendant of his chief, his rightful lord, to
refuse obedience to whom was a sin against the laws of God and man. He
fervently swore never to desert him, and despatched emissaries on all
sides to spread the tidings of his arrival, and excite the partizans of
the White Rose to his active assistance.

When the letters were written, council held, and a course of conduct
determined on, still the caravel of De Faro did not appear, and Richard
grew weary of his state of indolence. A week passed; and during the
second, at the conclusion of which, the answers from the noble
chieftains were expected, the duke of York announced to O'Water his
intention of visiting Buttevant, the seat of Lord Barry, where, in the
Abbey of Ballybeg, he hoped to find the abbot of Kilmainham; a man who,
in exile and poverty, exercised great influence over the Irish Yorkists.
He had been insolent and cruel towards his enemies when in power, but he
was endowed with popular qualities for his followers; while among his
friends, he was valued for his boldness, sagacity, and undaunted
courage. His career had been turbulent; he had supported himself against
his sovereign by acts of lawless violence, till, obliged at last to
yield, he found himself, in his old age, a poor brother in a distant
monastery, obliged, for safety's sake, to veil his lofty pretensions in
the obscurest guise. Lord Barry had offered him an asylum in the Abbey
of Ballybeg; venerating, with the blind admiration of a soldier, the
learning and craft of the priest, conjoined, as it here was, to
dauntless courage. O'Water, on the contrary, disliked the subtle prior,
and endeavoured to dissuade the prince from the journey; but he spurned
the city laziness, and in spite of his friends' entreaties, and their
fears for his safety among the followers of Desmond, Barry, and
Macarthy, departed on his intended visit, attended only by Hubert Burgh,
the foster-brother of Lord Barry.

The way from Cork to Buttevant was not far, but more desolate than
Granada during the Moorish war. Summer and the sun adorned that smiling
land, casting a verdurous mantle over her deep wounds, painting the rude
visage of war with brilliant hues. The forests, dark hills, and
uncultivated wilds of Munster, showed nakedly the deep traces of the
sovereign ill. But lately this neighbourhood had been the seat of war
between the earl of Desmond and the chief of the Macarthys; the latter
had fallen in battle, but his brother and Tanist had succeeded to him,
and was already gathering together his sept for a more desperate
struggle. Never in Spain had Richard seen such wild, strange figures, as
crossed his path during this short journey; whether it were the native
kern, wrapt in his mantle, disguised by his _glibb_, or long shaggy hair,
or the adherents of Desmond, who affected the state of an Irish
chieftain, whose leather-quilted jackets, long saffron-coloured shirts,
cloaks and shaggy moustachios, riding without stirrups, bearing spears,
formed objects not less uncouth and savage; the very women bore a
similar appearance of incivilization. And as a comment on such text,
Burgh told, as they rode, the history of the late wars of Desmond with
O'Carrol, prince of Ely, and with Macarthy; and, a still more dread
tale, the incursion of Murrogh-en-Ranagh, an O'Brien; who, rising first
in Clare, spread through the country, overrunning Munster, and bold from
success, advanced into eastern Leinster. All these accounts of battle
were interwoven with tales of feuds, handed down from father to son, of
the natural hatred of the native chiefs to the lords of English origin;
interspersed with such strange wild tales, where the avowedly
supernatural was intermingled with deeds of superhuman prowess and
barbarity, that the English born prince, nursling of romantic Spain,
felt as if he were transplanted into a new planet, and stopped the
speaker at each moment, to obtain some clearer explanation, or to have
interpreted words he had never before heard, the names of customs and
things found only in this land.

Thus entertained, the way to Buttevant, or as the Irish called it,
Kilnemullagh, which was about twenty miles, seemed short. One thing was
evident in all these details, that it was easy to rouse the English
lords in Ireland to any act of turbulence and revolt; but that it would
be difficult nevertheless for their ill-armed followers, and
undisciplined bands, to compete with the soldiery of England.




CHAPTER XVI

NEW FRIENDS


     Sisters, I from Ireland came.

                               COLERIDGE.


The duke, immediately on his arrival at the Castle of Buttevant,
despatched Hubert Burgh to the prior of Kilmainham, with a message from
himself and a token from Lord Barry, announcing his intention of
visiting him at the abbey the next day. But Keating feared thus to draw
the eyes of some enemy upon him, and appointed a meeting in a secluded
dell, near the bank of the Mullagh, or Awbeg, the river which Spenser
loves to praise. Early in the morning Richard repaired alone to this
rural presence-chamber, and found Keating already there. Hearing of the
priest's haughty pride, Richard, with a sensation of disgust, had
figured a man something like the wretched Trangmar, strong of limb, and
with a ferocious expression of countenance. Keating appeared in his
monk's humble guise; his light eyes were still lively, though his hair
and beard were snowy white; his brow was deeply delved by a thousand
lines; his person short, slender, bent; his step infirm; his voice was
silver-toned; he was pale, and his aspect in its lower part sweetly
serene. Richard looked with wonder on this white, withered leaf--a
comparison suggested by his frail tenuity; and again he almost quailed
before the eager scrutiny of the prior's eye. A merchant at a Moorish
mart he had seen thus scan a slave he was about to purchase. At length,
with a look of great satisfaction, the monk said, "This fits exactly;
our friends will not hesitate to serve so goodly a gentleman. The
daughter of York might in sooth mistake thee for a near kinsman. Thou
comest from Portugal, yet that could not have been thy native place?"

Richard started. This was the first time he had heard an expression of
doubt of his veracity. How could he reply? His word alone must support
his honour; his sword must remain sheathed, for his injurer was a
priest. Keating caught his haughty glance, and perceived his mistake. It
was with an effort that he altered his manner, for he exchanged with
pain a puppet subject to his will, for a man (prince or pretender) who
had objects and a state of his own to maintain. "Pardon the obscure
vision of an old man," he said; "my eyes were indeed dim not to see the
true marks of a Plantagenet in your appearance. I was but a boy when
your princely grandsire fell; nor has it been my fortune to visit
England or to see your royal father. But the duke of Clarence honoured
me with his friendship, and your cousin De la Poole acknowledged my zeal
in furthering his projects. I am now neither prior nor commander; but,
poor monk as I am become, I beseech your highness to command my
services."

This swift change of language but ill satisfied the pride of Richard,
and in reply, he briefly recounted such facts as established his right
to the name he claimed. The noble artlessness of his tone conquered the
priest's lurking suspicions: in a more earnest manner he besought the
duke's pardon; and a cordial intercourse was established between them.

The place where they met was secluded and wild; a bower of trees hid it
from the view of the river, and an abrupt rock sheltered it behind. It
was apparently accessible by the river only, and it was by its bank that
the duke and prior had arrived. Nothing could equal the picturesque
solitude around them. The waving of the leafy boughs, the scream of the
water-fowl, or the splashing they made as they sprung from among the
sedge and darted across the stream, alone interrupted the voiceless
calm; yet, at every moment, in his speech, Keating stopped, as if
listening, and cast his keen eyes, which he libelled much in calling
dim, up the steep crag, as if among its herbage and shrubs some dreaded
spy or expected messenger might appear. Then again he apologized to the
duke for having selected this wild spot for their interview. A price, he
observed, had been set upon his head, and his only safety lay in
perpetual watchfulness and never-sleeping caution. "My zeal in your
highness's cause," he added, with a courtier smile, "cannot be deemed a
strange frenzy, since your success will not only assure my restoration
to the dignity of which I have been unjustly deprived, but prevent an
old man from perpetually dreaming of the sword of the slayer, or the
more frightful executioner's axe."

Again the prior fixed his eyes on a fissure in the rock, adding, "I had
appointed to meet one in this place before your message was communicated
to me--and in good time; for, methinks, the object of your visit may be
furthered by the intelligence I hope soon to receive. Your highness must
have heard at Cork of the war carried on by the great earl of Desmond
and a native sept of this region. Macarthy, their chief, fell during the
struggle, but his successor and Tanist mustered his broken forces to
avenge him. The earl is impatient of this resistance, for his presence
is necessary in Thomond to drive the O'Carrols from that district. At
his invitation he and Macarthy meet this day to parley but a few miles
hence. I was to have made one among them, but a boding raven told me
that danger was abroad."

The tidings of the near presence of the earl of Desmond were unexpected,
and most welcome to the duke. He immediately resolved not to lose the
golden hour. He eagerly asked where the meeting was to be, and how
speedily he might reach the spot.

As he was thus earnestly expressing his desire, a slight rustling caught
the prior's ear: he looked up; a human form hovered as in mid-air,
scarcely, as it were, alighting on the precipitous rock; quickly, but
cautiously, it threaded its steep and tortuous path. A large mantle was
wrapt round the mountaineer, a large white kerchief enveloped the head
in the manner of a turban, yet the prince caught the outline of a female
figure, which soon descended to the little plain on which they stood,
and advanced towards them; she was evidently very young, but
weather-worn even in youth: her wild, picturesque dress concealed the
proportions of her form; her large white sleeves hid her arm, but the
emaciated appearance of her face and hands, and bare feet, struck
Richard with pity. She seemed astonished at seeing him, and spoke to his
companion in the language of the country, which he did not understand:
the prior's face darkened as she spoke: there dwelt on it a mixture of
disappointment and ferocity, of which it could hardly have been deemed
capable by one who had hitherto seen it only bland and smiling; swiftly,
however, he dismissed these indications of passion, and addressed the
prince calmly. "I cannot go," he said; "my time is still to be deferred,
though it shall not be for ever lost. How does your courage hold? if you
are not afraid of going alone with a guide whose very dialect is a
mystery to you, through a country torn by opposing factions; if you do
not fear presenting yourself friendless to a haughty noble, who deems
himself sovereign in this domain, I will contrive that, ere four hours
elapse, you shall find yourself in Desmond's presence."

"Fear!" the prince repeated. His eyes glanced with some contempt on the
priest's cowl, which alone could suggest pardon for such a thought; yet
he checked himself from any angry disclaiming of the accusation, as he
said, "Whatever in my presumption I may hope, sage forethought tells me
that I walk a road strewn with a thousand dangers, leading, it may be,
to an early death. Not for that will I deviate one furlong from my path.
Sir Prior, where is the guide you promise?"

Keating, after a few minutes' reflection, instead of replying, conversed
again with the girl, and then addressed the duke: "This hapless child is
a victim of the wars; she was born far hence, and is the last surviving
of my foster-sister's once blooming family. Her mother saved my life.
This child, barefoot as she is, guided me hither. Is not a Keating
fallen, when he cannot give succour to an offspring of his fosterer's
house? And she, poor girl! she has walked far for me to-day; but she
will not slacken in her toil when I bid her proceed. She shall be your
guide, and your grace may rely upon her; the dog you fed from its birth
were less faithful. Now, at the hour of noon, Desmond meets Macarthy of
Muskerry, on Ballahourah. But for the bogs and streams that cross your
path, it is not far; at the worst, you can reach Mallow, where the earl
will lie to-night. It is best not to delay; for, if there is peace in
Munster, very speedily Desmond will be on his way to Thomond."

This was a fresh spur to Richard. He accepted the proffered guide, who
listened attentively to Keating's instructions given in her native
tongue. He followed the girl but a short distance ere he looked back;
the prior was gone; the solitude of the wild crags and shrubs alone met
his eye. Meanwhile his companion stepped forward, motioning him to
follow. They plunged into the brake; the sun rose high; the birds winged
their glad flight among the trees. Now toiling up a steep, now wading a
stream, now entangled in a thicket, now stepping lightly over boggy
earth: now meditating on Andalusia, and now wondering at his present
position, Richard followed his swift and silent guide through the wild
country between Buttevant and Mallow.

Already the meeting between the earl of Desmond and Macarthy, the chief
of Muskerry, was at an end. They parted with fair words and exasperated
thoughts. The native lord could ill brook the settler's haughty
assumptions; nor Geraldine endure the obstinate pride of the conquered
native. Still their relative positions enforced a peace.

They had separated, and after a hasty repast, spread on the heathy side
of Ballahourah, the earl proceeded towards Mallow. He was surrounded by
warriors, who all claimed the Geraldine name, and who variously
distinguished themselves as the White Knight, the Knight of Kerry, and
the Knight of the Glen. There was Lord Fermoy, his father-in-law, and
others of the Roches. Nor did all the native chiefs absent themselves.
One sister of the earl had married Macarthy Reagh; another, an O'Brien,
whose daughter had intermarried with an O'Carrol--all this in defiance
of the English law, which forbade such alliances, through which, the
father of the present earl was beheaded in the year 1467. Their antique
costume, tight truise, saffron tunics, and flowing robes, distinguished
them from the Saxons; yet these had not followed the fashions of the
times, but dressed in the garb used by the courtiers of Edward the
Third.

Maurice, tenth earl of Desmond, was brave even to a proverb. He loved
war, and deemed himself rather king of Desmond, than a chief of English
descent. To extend and secure his possessions, rendering them at once
independent of his sovereign and of the native chieftains, was the aim
of his life. He now meditated the invasion of Thomond; but Macarthy's
angry demeanour showed that he must not be left unchecked in his rear.
"Where is my cousin Barry--where the lord of Buttevant--the chief of
the Barrymores? Flying before a slip of parchment indited in far London,
as if my sword held not better sway in these regions than a Parliament
attainder! Were he here, the O'Carrolls should hear the thunder of my
arms ere this moon waned. Muskerry could make no gathering in the vales,
while Barry sat on his perch at Buttevant."

The earl had time to waste in thought, as he was borne along--at the
age of fifteen, pushing rashly forward in an assault, he received a
wound in his leg, which lamed him for life, so that he was carried about
in a litter, and went by the name of Claudus; yet he was not deemed the
less an experienced and gallant warrior. With the virtues of a chieftain
he possessed the defects: Munster was his world; his universe was
peopled by the Geraldines, the Macarthys, the Barrys, Donegans,
Barrets, Roches, O'Briens, O'Carrolls, and the rest; he disdained his
noble brethren of the pale. He considered it a mark of distinction to be
exempted by a law from attendance of Parliament and the government of
the land; he saw in the king of England, not his monarch, but the
partizan of Ormond, and therefore an enemy. This, and an ancient
alliance, linked him to the cause of the English outcast prince, who
solicited his aid; he had replied favourably to his request; but his
interests and the conquest of a kingdom must be delayed, while he
subdued the half-naked septs who insulted his power.

While thus busied, reflecting upon the events of the day, the earl sat
silent and thoughtful. Suddenly, at a turn in the road, he called on his
followers to stop; his eye lighted up,--he saw two horsemen swiftly
approaching--Lord Barry was the foremost rider. Forgetting his lameness
in his joy, the noble warrior almost threw himself from the litter, as
he cried, "Jesu speed you, my loving cousin! spur on! spur on! remember
your badge, _Boutez en avant_! No enemy ever turned his back on your sword
to avoid, so eagerly as my arms will open to receive you! Were you
bound for Mallow?"

"No, my noble coz," replied Lord Barry, "I am for Kilnemullagh; an
eaglet I have nursed has winged its way thither, and I fear may suffer
injury in my absence; for he is young, and his pinions all untried."

"Leave him to his fate, my lord," said the earl; "if he be a faithful
bird he will find his way back to his fosterer; meanwhile the king of
eagles, thy cousin Desmond himself, has need of thee."

"One word, dear Maurice, will explain the greater duty that I owe my
princely fowl. The White Hose of England, missing him, loses all; you,
I, each, and every one of us, are his servants and must become his
soldiers."

"Cousin," replied Desmond, "one son of York made my father, whose soul
God assoilzie! Lord Deputy; another chopped off his head--so much for
the White Rose! Still I allow this new Lancastrian king is a bitterer
enemy: he is a friend of the Butlers, whom the fiend confound. We will
first subdue the O'Carrolls, humble the Macarthys, take Coollong from
Clan Cartie Reagh, and root out the Desies; and then, when we are kings
of Munster, in good hour let us march with your duke of York, and set
our foot on the necks of the Butlers in Dublin."

The earl spoke with rapidity and energy; all Munster spread before Lord
Barry's mind--city, town, stronghold, held by ancestral enemies; and it
was wonderful what a change was wrought in his mind by his cousin's
eloquence, and the names of all these sons of Erin, with each of whom he
had a mortal quarrel. He agreed, therefore, to go with the earl to
Mallow that evening, postponing his visit to Buttevant till the
following day.

Such were the wise counsels that stayed the mighty power Barry had
promised York should rise at his name to vanquish England. It was better
thus; so the royal boy thought himself, when, welcomed by Desmond at
Mallow, he looked round on kern and gallowglass, hearing a language that
was not English, viewing their strange attire and savage countenances.
"It is not thus, my England, that I will seize on you. Your own nobles
shall place the crown on my head; your people wield the sword that will
injure only our common enemy. Shall I make a Granada of my native land,
and shed Christian blood, better spilt in the cause of God against
infidel dogs?"

When the earl of Desmond found that the prince, whom he regretted to
receive with such cold hopes, was well content, nothing doubting that
the good-will of the English would prove a better ally than the spears
of the Irish, he conceived a sudden affection for him. It was no wonder;
for the ingenuousness of untarnished youth is ineffably winning; and
here it was added to a quick wit, a grace and gallantry, that shone as a
vision of light in this wild region.

A few days brought still greater satisfaction to all parties. An embassy
had arrived in Cork from the king of France to the duke of York to
invite him to Paris. Desmond would not relinquish his guest: he carried
him to his noble seat at Ardfinnin; and thither repaired in due time the
messengers from Charles the Eighth.

The chief of these was our old friend Frion, besides a Frenchman called
Lucas, and two Englishmen, Stephen Poytron and John Tiler. The duke was
not well pleased with the selection of Frion; but, while this man by his
singular arts of insinuation made good his cause, Barry showed how in
two points his cause was benefitted by him. First, that having been
secretary to Henry, he knew many secrets, and was acquainted with many
circumstances that might be turned to use; and, secondly, that his very
attempt to entrap the prince was a proof that he was fully aware of who
he was; that he would prove a useful link between Perkin Warbeck,
Richard Fitzroy, and the duke of York; that he need be no more trusted
than was deemed expedient; but that meanwhile it were good to entertain
him with fair words. Richard yielded; and Frion made good use of this
standing-room by which he meant to move the world. Master of the arts of
flattery, cunning and wise, he so ingratiated himself with the duke, and
afterwards with his other friends, that by degrees he was admitted to
their confidence; and at last succeeded in his chief wish, of becoming
follower, secretary, counsellor, he called himself friend, of the
English prince.

Urged by the earl of Desmond and Lord Barry, and sufficiently inclined
in his own mind, the duke accepted the French king's invitation, and
prepared to cross to France. On the very eve of his departure, he was
surprised by a visit from John O'Water, of Cork. This warm-hearted old
man had conceived a paternal love for the royal youth. He came to
recommend his return to Cork--his taking up a kind of regal residence
there--the not deserting a nook of his kingdom which acknowledged him.
He came too late:--already the prince was on board the vessel in
Youghall Harbour which was to convey him away. "One day you will return
to us, my lord," said O'Water; "a future day will afford us opportunity
to prove our zeal. I am old; I had given up public life: but I will take
to the oar again. John O'Water will once more be mayor of Cork, and his
right beloved Sovereign shall command him in his service."

The good man departed; with blessings, thanks, and glad prognostics,
Desmond and Barry also took leave of him. The wind was fair, the sea
smooth: before morning they lost sight of the hospitable shores of
Ireland, and turned their thoughts from its quarrels, its chieftains,
its warm hearts, and kind reception, to the civilized land of France,
and the more influential protection promised by its king to the royal
adventurer.




CHAPTER XVII

THE FRENCH COURT


     Long die thy happy days before thy death;
     And, after many lengthened hours of grief,
     Die neither mother, wife nor England's queen!

                                               SHAKSPEARE.


The voyage of the duke of York was easy and auspicious. He repaired to
Paris; and all the exiled Yorkists, to the number of one hundred
gentlemen, instantly gathered round him, offering him their services,
and forming his court, Charles assigned him magnificent apartments in
the Tuileries, and appointed a guard of honour, under the command of the
lord of Concressault, who, as was the case with every one who approached
him, soon became warmly attached to the princely youth. Having just
concluded a peace with Britany by marrying its young duchess, the king
of France found himself in so prosperous a state at home, that he began
to look abroad for wars, and resolved to invade Naples, to whose crown
he had a claim. Meanwhile, the utmost splendour and gaiety reigned in
Paris:--balls, tournaments, and hunting-parties, succeeded one to the
other; now to celebrate a marriage--now to grace the entrance of some
noble gentleman into the order of knighthood. Charles was an amiable
prince--his queen a beautiful and spirited lady--the duke of Orleans
an accomplished and adventurous cavalier. They all vied in acts of
courtesy and kindness towards their royal visitor. There was an
innocence in Richard's vivacity, an ingenuousness in his reliance on
their protection, that particularly captivated the chivalrous Orleans
and the fair Queen Anne. How changed the scene from the wilds of Ireland
and the semi-barbarous halls of the Desmond! The courtly and soft grace
of the French, different from the dignity of the Spaniard, was
irresistible to the inexperienced youth. It seemed to him that his
standard was set up here for ever. No change could sully the fair favour
of these illustrious friends. All young as he was, to be treated as
rightful king of England by this potent government satisfied for the
moment his ambition. He and his English friends welcome everywhere, all
honoured--himself beloved--were the ascendant star in Paris. O'Maurice
of Desmond! O'Barry, and good, honest--hearted O'Water!--though still he
acknowledged your kindness, how did your uncivilized hospitalities fade
before the golden splendour of King Charles's court!

York might by the sober be blamed for yielding to the current, for
setting his swelling canvas with the favouring wind--exulting. It was a
boy's blindness; the unsuspiciousness of inexperience; the fault lay in
the falsehood; and that was not his.

On the sixth of October Henry the Seventh landed at Calais; on the
nineteenth he sat down before Boulogne, with sixteen hundred
men-at-arms, and twenty-five thousand infantry. Charles could not much
fear the tardy operations of his foe; but the name of an English
invasion, so associated with defeat and disaster, was portentous to the
French: besides, Charles was eager to prepare for his Italian wars. Thus
disposed, peace was easily brought about. One only obstacle presented
itself. Henry insisted that the newly-arrived duke of York should be
delivered up to him; Charles rejected the proposition with disdain: the
negotiations were suspended, and the French king grew uneasy: it was no
pleasant thing to have thirty or forty thousand of those English in the
kingdom, who had disputed it inch by inch, at the expense of so much
misery and slaughter, with his grandfather. Their king was averse to
war; but the body of the army, the nobles, and leaders, ardently desired
it: some intrigue, some accident, might light up a train to be quenched
only by seas of blood; and all this for a prince, in whom, except that
he was gallant and unfortunate, Charles took no concern.

Richard, basking in the noon-day of regal favour, of a sudden felt a
cloud spread athwart his sunshine, and a chill take place of the glowing
warmth. The complaints of his followers, principally of Lady Brampton,
opened his eyes; for the king and princes, on the eve of betraying him,
were in manner kinder than ever. First, Queen Anne asked this lady, if
it were not the duke's intention to repair to Flanders, to claim the
support of the Lady Margaret. It seemed as if nothing was to be spoken
of but Brussels, the Low Countries, Maximilian of Austria, and, above
all, the virtues and sagacity of the illustrious widow of Charles the
Rash. In youth we are slow to understand the covert language of
duplicity. Frion was next put in requisition; he arrived in Paris after
ten days' absence, with an invitation to her so-named nephew from the
duchess of Burgundy; and when, from the disinclination of the French to
an act of glaring inhospitality, and of the English so to pain the
confiding spirit of their prince, he was still kept darkling, suddenly
one night his friend, the sire de Concressault, visited him. He brought
many sugared words from his sovereigns; but the end was, that their ever
dear friend, and most honoured guest, the duke of York, would render
them special pleasure, if, for some short time, he would visit Brussels.
The fiery spirit of youth blazed forth at a dismission, still more when
Concressault added, that horses were already prepared, and everything
arranged for his immediate departure. To qualify this insult,
Concressault could best bring his own warm, affectionate feelings. He
loved the English prince, and by the frankness of his explanations,
soothed him, while he made the wound deeper, by showing whence it was
directed, and that Henry Tudor's was the master-hand.

This name calmed York by elevating his thoughts above the actual evil.
"It is well, my lord: I shall obey," he said; "I had forgotten myself;
and your monarch's kindness was an opiate to my unripened purpose. I
might have lived his happy truest; reigning over the English hearts
around me, forgetful, like Dan Ulysse of old in the Lotus land, of my
native isle, and rightful kingdom, I thank my enemy he has not permitted
this: his insults rouse me; his injuries place the sword in my hand; on
him fall the harm."

The French sovereigns did all they could to salve this ill-favoured
wound. The duke of Orleans visited York at the moment of his departure;
his English partizans were loaded with presents; he quitted France; and,
on the day following, the treaty of peace with England was signed.

Pride, indignation, and heroic resolve sustained the duke under this
insult; but violent, angry emotion was foreign to his disposition, and
only kept alive in his bosom at the expense of much suffering. How
gladly he took refuge from these painful sensations in the gratitude and
affection inspired by his noble aunt. Margaret had never seen him; the
earl of Lincoln, Lady Brampton, Lovel, Plantagenet, and others were
vouchers for his truth; still his first unsupported appearance in
Ireland, and his long absence in Spain, engendered doubts, not in her
mind, but in Maximilian and other nobles and counsellors around her. She
replied to their arguments, but they remained unconvinced; at once,
therefore, to justify her acknowledgment of him in their eyes, and to
force them to the same credence as herself, she caused his first
audience to be a solemn one, nor gave him a kinswoman's reception until
he had proved his right to it.

He, who has heard some one falsely traduced and vilely calumniated, and,
if not quite believing the detraction, yet impelled by it to some
distaste of its object, and when that object appeared, radiant in
innocence, attended by the dignity of truth and conscious worth, at once
has yielded to the evidence of sense, will have some understanding of
what passed in the mind of Margaret of Burgundy. None could resist the
frank, blue, unclouded eye of the prince; that voice and manner, replete
with simplicity and native honour. He replied to the duchess's questions
briefly or otherwise, as appeared most pertinent, but in a way that
vanquished the most sceptical person present. The warm-hearted duchess
had hardly contained herself from the moment she beheld this youthful
image of her dead brother. As the tones of a remembered melody awaken
from sweet and bitter association unbidden tears, so did his voice, his
gestures, the very waving of his glossy curls, strike the mute chords of
many a forgotten memory. As soon as she saw belief and satisfaction in
the countenances of those around her, she no longer restrained herself;
with tears she embraced him; with a broken voice she presented her
nephew to all around. Now to heap favours on him was her dear delight:
she loved not the name of the duke of York, because, his pretensions
admitted, he was something more; but he objected firmly to the empty
title of king, and reiterated his determination to assume that only at
Westminster. So she invented other names; the prince of England, and the
White Rose of England, were those he went by; she appointed him a guard
of thirty halberdiers in addition to that formed by his English
followers. Nor did she rest here; it was her ardent wish to place him on
the throne of his father. The glad welcome she gave to the Yorkists, as,
from far exile in distant lands, or obscure hiding in England, they
repaired to her nephew's court, her discourse of succour, armies, plots
quickly raised a spirit that spread to the near island; and the rumour
of this new White Rose became a watch-word of hope for York, of fear for
Lancaster.

The riches and magnificence of the now extinguished house of Burgundy,
almost equalled that of Paris; their cavaliers were as noble and as
gallant; their tournaments and feasts as gay and pompous. The prince
felt his situation much changed for the better. His aunt's warm
affection was more worth than Charles's politic and courteous
protection. There he was an honoured visitor, here one of the
family--his interests apparently bound up with theirs. His long-tried
friends exulted in his position; Plantagenet and Lady Brampton
congratulated each other. The English exiles, Sir George Neville and Sir
John Taylor, the one proud and discontented, the other extravagant and
poor, blessed the day which gave them dignity and station, as chief
attendants and counsellors of the noble York. One friend he missed: his
childhood's companion, his gentle nurse, his beloved Monina.

She had accompanied Lady Brampton to Paris, when intelligence came of
Trangmar's treachery, of the falsehood of his pretensions; and, at the
same time, letters were covertly conveyed to Lady Brampton from the
dowager queen, in which mention was made of this man as a trustworthy
agent: the Yorkists desired much to fathom this mystery, and to have
some explicit elucidation from the imprisoned Elizabeth. As they
canvassed the various modes by which this might be accomplished--the
disguises that might be assumed--Monina preferred an earnest prayer,
that she might be permitted to undertake the task; a thousand
circumstances rendered this desirable--she would be entirely
unsuspected, and she was fully acquainted with the circumstances of the
case. Three days before Richard landed in France from Ireland, Monina
crossed to England--she assumed a pilgrim's garb, and without danger or
much difficulty, arrived at London from the sea-coast.

The sudden apparition of Richard, first in Ireland, and afterwards in
Paris, was a stunning blow to Henry. No Trangmar arrived to explain the
riddle; and, in spite of his caution and his cruelty, he had been unable
to avert the event he dreaded--nothing could he do now better than to
scoff at his rival, and to oppose his statements with counter
declarations; spreading around his spies to stop at its very outset any
symptom of rebellion in England. He caused stricter watch than ever to
be set on the unfortunate Elizabeth Woodville, who had been for six
years the melancholy inmate of her convent prison. All necessity of
caution there was soon to be at an end; her health had long
declined--latterly she had wasted to a mere shadow, so that the
continuance of life in her attenuated frame appeared a miracle: a
feeling of suffocation prevented her from lying down; she sat propped by
pillows: her fleshless hands incapable of any office, her cheeks fallen
in; her eyes alone--last retreat of the spirit of life--gleamed
brightly amid the human ruin. So long had she been thus, that her death,
apparently so near, was hardly feared by those around. Henry almost
considered her danger as a new artifice, and absolutely refused her last
request, to be permitted to see her daughter and grand-children once
again. Her last hour approached; and none were near save the nuns of the
convent, who almost revered her as a saint.

There arrived at the monastery a pilgrim, with relics collected in Araby
and Spain. She was admitted into the parlour; and one simple sister
asked for some wonder-working relic that might give health to the dying.
The pilgrim heard of Elizabeth's hopeless state: she begged to be
admitted to her presence, that she might try the virtues of a precious
balsam given her by the monks of Alcala-la-Real in Spain. Elizabeth was
informed of her request: when last she had heard of her son, he was at
Alcala--all the strength that had prolonged her life now roused itself;
with earnestness she desired that the Spanish maiden might be admitted
to her presence. It was Henry's express command that none should see
her; but she was dying; his power, so soon to be at end, might well
slacken in its rigour at the very verge of its annihilation.

The pilgrim knelt beside the queen's couch--the nuns, commanded to
retreat, observed a miracle--the dying appeared again to live; the grim
spectre, who had planted his banner in the chamber, retreated for a
moment, as Elizabeth listened to Monina's whispered words, "Oh, for one
hour more," she cried, "I have so much to say. He comes then, my son
comes! Oh, rouse England with the tale--Sir William Stanley, you must
visit him--bid him not draw his sword against my Edward's son. Say to
the dean of St. Paul's--I feel faint," she continued, "my voice fails
me--I must leave all unsaid, save this--His sister must not doubt his
truth; Henry must not shed the blood of his wife's brother."

"Madam," said Monina, "let me bear some token to my lady the queen."

"A token--no words can these weak fingers trace. Yet stay; in the
missal there is a prayer which each day I addressed to heaven to
preserve my son. Bear the missal to my Elizabeth, bid her listen to you,
and believe."

With trembling hands the young girl took the small, but splendid volume.
The queen then dismissed her with a faintly spoken blessing and a
prayer. Before night all was over--the cause of her son moved her no
more--her sorrowing heart reposed from every strife--she died. The
vase replete with so much anguish was broken--the "silver cord," that
bound together a whole life of pain, loosened. Her existence had been
woe; her death was the dearest blessing she could receive from heaven.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE TOKEN


     She was most beautiful to see,
     Like a lady of a far countree.

                                 COLERIDGE.


While in attendance on the king at his palace of Shene, the lord
chamberlain, Sir William Stanley, was informed that a young and foreign
lady requested an audience with him. Monina was ushered in--her
extraordinary beauty--her large soft eyes--the fascinating sweetness
of her manner, at once charmed the worthy gentleman. She spoke in good
but accentuated English, and informed Sir William that she came from the
death-bed of the queen of England.

"I know," said Stanley, "that her grace has long been ill, but ----"

"God take her to his mercy," interrupted Monina, "she died last night."

"Is his majesty informed of this event?" Sir William asked.

"It is not yet noon," replied the maiden; "by that hour the messengers
from the convent will arrive. I have reasons for greater speed. I bear
the royal lady's last words to her daughter, the queen Elizabeth; you,
my lord, will favour me by procuring an immediate interview with her
majesty."

Stanley knew the aversion the king had to any private intercourse
between Elizabeth and her mother. He informed his visitor that she must
first obtain the king's permission for this audience, which he did not
believe would be granted; but Monina, without hesitation, declared that
she would apply for it to the king, and requested the chamberlain to
introduce her. Stanley, good-natured but timid, hesitated--she would
not be denied--at last he hit upon an expedient. Henry had gone out
hawking in the park: if she would place herself at the gate on his
return, she might prefer her prayer--he would be near to insure her
being heard.

Noontide was approached. The sport was over, and the royal party on
their return. Henry rode foremost with Morton, while his retinue
followed at a slower pace, conversing gaily about the birds; now and
then hazarding a remark on the war, so oft delayed, at last declared.
They were interrupted by the arrival of Sir William Stanley, who
communicated to the king the tidings of the dowager queen's death. Six
long years had passed since the battle of Stoke, and the commencement of
Elizabeth Woodville's imprisonment. She was forgotten at court. Many
there had never seen her; few remembered her as the reigning queen of
England. Her history was almost like a romance of the olden time; yet,
forgotten during life, her death clouded the hilarity of those who heard
it. Among those most affected by these tidings, as was natural, was her
son, the marquess of Dorset; he hastily rode up to receive from
Stanley's own lips confirmation of the news. Feeling that of late he had
almost forgotten and wholly neglected his mother, a sudden visitation of
remorse was blended with the grief that choked his voice, and blinded
his eyes with tears. Henry, who was attached to him, viewed with pity
the bitter regret of his gay, unheeding kinsman, and bade him, ere ruder
tongues proclaimed it, bear the melancholy tidings to his royal sister.
Dorset, gladly escaping from the throng, rode swiftly forward. Meanwhile
the order of the ride was disturbed. The nobles conversed earnestly
together. After a few questions, Henry remained lost in thought: eager
perhaps to know whether her secret had died with her; and viewing in her
demise one master testimony the less in favour of his young competitor.
Stanley awaited with some inquietude for the moment when they should
encounter Monina. They passed the park gate. She was not there. Henry
pursued his way, and entered the palace. Still she did not appear.

Lord Dorset had ridden on with the speed of a man who seeks to escape
from himself. Death has more power in its mere sound, than the
enchanting touch of a wizard's rod. She was dead--how awful was that
word!--the unfailing friend, his mother! All his remissness towards her
took a monstrous form: he felt that if he had wearied Henry with
prayers, he might have extorted some mitigation of her suffering; and it
would have consoled her in her solitude, to have received the balmy
medicine of filial tenderness, which he had neglected to pay. At that
moment he would have given his marquisate to a beggar, to have purchased
the memory of one action done to soothe her woful end. The pomp of a
funeral--masses for her soul--these were small compensations, which
her arch enemy, even Henry himself, could, and probably would concede.
The voice of affection--the duteous affection of a child--he only
could have afforded; and he had withheld it.

Monina stood at the park gate, attended by her Spanish domestic, whose
singular costume alone must attract regard. "What do you here, maiden?"
cried Dorset; "the king and his court will speedily pass this way: this
is no fitting place for you."

"I am here," she replied, "to see and speak to your king. I come to
prefer a request in the name of one whom God take to his place; she can
disturb him no more."

"You are from Bermondsey--from----" The words choked Dorset. Monina
continued:--"I come from the death-bed of the Lady Elizabeth of
England."

"What demand would you make on his majesty?" said the marquess; "do you
seek a guerdon for your pains? Speak, then, to me--I am her son."

He was about to draw forth his purse; but her look, which grew animated,
prevented him, as she said, "I come on a holy errand. The dying lady
commanded me to convey her last words to her royal daughter. I seek
permission from your king to fulfil her wish."

Dorset was thoughtless and eager. He saw no objection that Henry could
have that his sister should have the last message from her now dead
parent; so without hesitation he told the maiden that by Henry's
permission he was now about to communicate the sad intelligence to the
queen, and that she might accompany him.

It is thus by small invisible threads that Fate weaves the intricate web
of our lives. All hung by the slenderest tissue: had Monina seen Henry,
most assuredly he would have prevented the interview she sought, and
have used his utmost craft to discover whether the fatal secret made a
part of the queen's message. Now his sagacity, his caution, his severity
were of no avail. Monina stood in the presence of his wife.

Six years had considerably altered Elizabeth; habitual fear had
engendered a moral timidity, which was not natural to her, for she was
the daughter of a proud race: her sweetness, her affectionate
disposition still remained; but her soul was sad, and she looked pale
and inanimate. The news of her mother's death moved her to tears. One
expression of bitter regret burst from her lips; it was mingled with
blame of her consort; and she checked herself, while she wept still more
abundantly. Dorset felt uneasy at the sight of female tears; he longed
to escape. Monina's request for a private interview came to liberate
him; he presented her to his sister, and hurried away.

Elizabeth eagerly asked many questions concerning her mother's dying
moments. The Spanish maiden, wondering at her own success, fearful of
interruption, presented the missal, and then hastened to declare the
motive for which it was sent. She opened the jewelled clasps, and showed
the queen the prayer written in her mother's hand on a blank leaf of the
brilliantly-illuminated pages. Rapidly the enthusiastic girl detailed
the escape, the exile of the duke of York, while Elizabeth, not daring
to believe her own senses, astounded, terrified, looked with largo open
eyes on the animated countenance of her lovely visitant. Before Monina
paused, or gave time for an answer, they were interrupted by the
entrance of Sir William Stanley. He started when he saw Monina, nor did
the confused look of his queen, as she hastily closed the fatal volume,
tend to reassure him. He came to announce a visit from Henry to
Elizabeth. Frightened at what he saw, he hardly permitted a slight
interchange of greeting, but hurried Monina away, through a door hid by
the tapestry, down a narrow staircase into a garden, and then by a small
gate that opened on a court. In this court was placed the entrance to
the apartments of the pages and esquires of the king. Stanley unlocked
the gate cautiously, hesitating before he permitted his fair companion
to pass on, in the fear that some mischievous boy or prying servitor
might be there to wonder at and question wherefore he led the maiden
from the queen's garden through a door, sacred, and never opened, into
the resort of wild and dissolute youth. As he unclosed the wicket, at
its very entrance, standing so that in spite of every caution a full
view of Monina was at once afforded, stood a young man, whose
countenance bespoke him to be ever on the alert for gamesome tricks or
worse mischief. His first aspect was that of recklessness; his second
spoke of baser habits; and athwart both broke gleams now of better
feelings, now of desperate passion. He had heard the rusty bolts move,
and perceived the slow opening of the door. Knowing how sacred was the
respect enforced towards this ingress to the queen's retirement, he
stood close to discover and shame any intruder. "In good season, my Lord
Chamberlain!" he at first exclaimed, vexed to find no cause for taunt,
till perceiving his fair companion, the expression of his countenance
changed to irony, as he cried, "Whither so fast and fearfully, my good
lord? Does her grace deal in contraband; and art thou the huckster?"

"As ill luck will have it, wild Robin Clifford!" cried Stanley, angrily.

"Nay, we are brothers in wildness now, fair sir," retorted the other;
"and I claim my part here."

Clifford approached Monina; but Stanley interposed. "Waste your ribaldry
on me, good knight, but spare this child. Let us pass in all speed, I
pray you."

Monina drew back; but Clifford still followed. "Child! In good hour she
is young; and but that burning suns have made her cheek tawny, I might
call her fair. She is well worth your pains, and I praise them. Sweet
mistress, I am beholden to my Lord Chamberlain for making us friends."

He was running on thus; but Monina, collecting her spirits, raised her
large eyes on him. His name had caught her ear; she remembered partly
having seen him on the night of their flight from Tournay; and frequent
mention had subsequently been made of him by the cousins. She
began--"Sir Robert Clifford, I know you will not harm me."

"Thanks for that knowledge, pretty one," cried the youth; "old
grey-beards only, with frozen hearts (pardon me, Sir William!), could
injure thee; thou art sure of good from tall fellows (though in troth
tall I am not) like me."

Sir William writhed with impatience; again and again he would have
interrupted the intruder. Monina replied:--"We have met before--when
you served him I now serve. I speak in his name: for the sake of Perkin
Warbeck, detain me no longer. Noble sir, I attend you. Sir Clifford
yields respect to the words I have spoken."

"They are strange indeed, maiden," he replied, "and I must hear more of
this. We have met before, I now believe; and we must meet again.
Meanwhile, I will keep off bird-catchers till you and his reverence get
clear of these limed twigs. Ah! I see a gallant; I will go draw William
d'Aubigny aside while you pass forth."

And now again Sir William proceeded on his expedition, and conducted his
gentle companion beyond the precincts of the palace. As they parted one
from the other, Monina, in a brief, energetic manner, delivered the
message of the departed queen to the good chamberlain: he was more
disconcerted than surprised, and the reflection that Clifford was a
party to the secret, added to his consternation. He felt how far he was
compromised by the introduction of Monina to the young queen; fear for a
while palsied his better feelings: he replied only by entreating her not
to remain longer in London, but to embark in all haste for France: he
then quitted her, yet again came back to ask where she sojourned in
town, and turned away a second time, as if to escape from his better
self, and from the interest he felt in King Edward's son, which impelled
him to ask a thousand questions.

He returned to the courtyard of the palace, and found Clifford pacing
its length in deep thought. Monina's words had awakened a thousand ideas
in his unquiet bosom. Since the event to which she referred, when he
delivered Richard from Frion's hands, he had run a headlong, ruinous
course. No character can be wholly evil; and Clifford's was not
destitute of good, though overgrown and choked up by weedy vices, so
that his better nature too often served but as a spur and incentive to
folly and crime. He was generous; but that led to rapacity; since,
unable to deny himself or others, if he despoiled himself one day, on
the next he engaged in the most desperate enterprises to refill the
void. He was bold--that made him fearless in doing wrong; and to drown
the gentle spirit of humanity, which, too often for his own peace,
sprung up in his heart, he hardened himself in selfishness; then, as his
sensitive, undisciplined nature received new impressions, he was
cowardly, cruel, and remorseless. He had never forgotten the princely
boy he had saved: he turned to that recollection as to one of the few
oases of virtue in the far extended desert of ill, over which, in hours
of satiety or despondency, his sickening memory wandered. Indeed, he was
yet too young to be decidedly vicious: for at one-and-twenty a thousand
mere human impulses, unrepressed by worldly wisdom, occasion sallies of
kindly sympathy. The worst was, that Clifford was a ruined man: his
fortunes were nought, his reputation shaken on its base; he veiled, by
an appearance of hilarity and recklessness, the real despair that gnawed
at his heart, when he considered all that he might have been--the worse
than nothing that he was. Hitherto he had, to a great degree, blinded
the world, and he longed for some adventure, some commotion, either
public or private, that should refill his emptied money-bags, and paint
him fair in men's eye's: all these considerations mingled incongruously
to make him wish to know more of the outcast duke. He awaited the return
of Stanley--he learned the name of the Spanish girl: as they spoke,
both became aware that the other possessed a secret each dreaded to
avow. Clifford first dashed through the flimsy barrier of useless
discretion, and related his adventure at Lisle; meantime Sir William
broke forth in lamentation, that young Richard should have been induced
to quit the security of private life, to enter on an unequal and bloody
contest, which could only end in destruction to himself and his
partizans, while England would again be made the tomb of the Irish (the
landing of Richard at Cork was all that was then known), whom he might
allure from their woods and bogs to ravage the more gifted sister isle.
A new light was let in on Clifford at these words. Was the game already
playing--the box shaken--the die about to fall? This required his
attention, and determined his half-formed purpose of visiting, that same
night, the daughter of de Faro.




CHAPTER XIX

CLIFFORD'S RESOLVE


     His father was a right good lord,
       His mother a lady of high degree;
     But they, alas! were dead him frae,
       And he loved keeping companie.

     To spend the day with merry cheer,
       To drink and revel every night;
     To card and dice from eve to morn,
       It was, I ween, his heart's delight.

                                     THE HEIR OF LYNNE.


It had been Monina's design to return to the protection of Lady
Brampton, immediately on the fulfilment of her task in England. The
appearance of Clifford suggested other ideas. It was the duty of every
friend of York to declare his existence, and claim the allegiance of his
subjects. It might seem a hopeless enterprise for her, a young foreign
girl, to do this in the heart of the usurper's power; and yet she
fancied that she might attempt it with success. The most distant
prospect of serving her beloved friend was hailed by her with romantic
ardour; while the knowledge possessed by Stanley and Clifford promised
to render her undertaking less nugatory in its effects. Her purpose was
quickly formed. She resolved to postpone her departure, and to busy
herself in replanting, in Tudor's own city of London, the uprooted
rose-bush, parent of the spotless flower. None but a woman's fond
enthusiastic heart can tell the glow of joy, the thrilling gladness,
that diffused itself through her frame, as this plain spread itself,
clear as a map, beautiful as a champagne country viewed from some
overtopping mountain peak, to her keen mind's eye. She rode to London
occupied by these thoughts, and on her arrival, announced to the
merchant friend, at whose house she resided, her intention of remaining
in England: the vessel that was on the morrow to have conveyed her away
would bear instead a letter to Lady Brampton, explanatory of her hopes
and intentions: that very night, in the seclusion of her chamber, she
robbed some hours from sleep to write it; her enthusiasm animated her
expressions; her cheeks glowed as she wrote, for she spoke of services
she might render to him who was the idol of her thoughts; though with
his idea she consciously mingled no feeling save that of devoted
friendship and an intense desire to benefit. The weariness of spirit
that oppressed her in his absence, she did not attribute to him.

Thus intently occupied, she was unaware of a parley in the room beneath
growing into a loud contention, till steps upon the stairs recalled her
wandering thoughts; she looked up from her task; but her gaze of inquiry
was changed to an expression of heartfelt pleasure, when Sir Robert
Clifford entered the apartment. Here then her enterprise commenced.
There was something that did not quite please her in the manners of her
visitant, but this was secondary to the great good she might achieve
through him. Her eyes danced in their own joy, as she cried, "Welcome,
gallant gentleman! you are here to my wish: you come to learn how best
you may prove your allegiance to your rightful sovereign, your zeal in
his cause."

These words grated somewhat on the ear of a man who had hitherto worn
the Red Rose in his cap, and whose ancestors had died for Lancaster. He
did not, therefore, reply in the spirit of her wish when he said, "We
will not quarrel, pretty one, about names; sooth is it, that I came to
learn tidings of my princely gossip, and I am right glad that fortune
makes thee the tale-bearer. Prolong as thou wilt, I shall never cry hold
while my eyes serve to make true harmony to the sound of your sweet
voice."

Much more he said in the same strain of gallantry, as he placed himself
beside the maiden, with the air of one whose soft speeches ever found
ready hearing. Monina drew back, replying, gently, "I am the partizan,
the vowed conspirator for a cause, whose adherents walk as over the
thread-broad ridge spanning an unfathomable gulph, which I have heard
spoken of by the Moors in my own Granada; I beseech you, as you are a
gentleman, reserve your fair speeches for the fortunate ladies of your
native land. I will be a beacon-light to guide you, a clue for your use
through a maze, a landmark to point your way; meanwhile, forget me as I
am; let me be a voice only."

"As soon forget sunshine or moonshine, or the chance of play when the
dice-box rattles," thought Clifford, as she clasped her little fingers
in the fervour of her wish, and raised on him her soft, full eyes: but
though he gazed with unrepressed admiration, he said nothing as she told
the story of Duke Richard's Spanish adventures, and last of his attempt
in Ireland and the embassy sent to him by King Charles. How eloquently
and well she told his tale! speaking of him with unfeigned admiration,
nothing disguising her zealous devotion. "Sir Clifford," she continued,
"you are his friend. His cause will sanctify your sword; it will call
you from the paltry arts of peace to the nobler deeds of chivalry; it
will give you grace in the eyes of her you love, defending and asserting
your king."

She paused, breathless from her own agitation; she looked up into his
thoughtful face and placed her hands on his; the soft touch awoke him
from a reverie in which he had lost himself.

"Maiden," he replied, "you plead your cause even too well; you have cast
a spell upon me; so that at this moment I would readily swear to perform
your bidding, but that, when I do not see your witch's eyes, nor hear
your magic voice, another wind may blow me right to the other side. Do
not call this courtly gallantry, would by Saint Cupid that it were! for
I am not pleased to behold my sage self fined down into a woman's tool:
nor is it love;--Thor's hammer could not knock a splinter from my hard
heart, nor the Spanish sun thaw its seven-fold coat of ice. I never have
loved; I never shall: but there is some strange sorcery about you. When
I next see you, I will draw a circle round, knock my head three times on
the eastern floor, and call out 'aroint!' This twinkling light too, and
darkling hour--I must away:--sunshine shall, when next we meet,
protect me from your incantations. Will you trust yourself? At
to-morrow's noon a servitor of mine shall await you at the gate of St.
Paul's: dare you commit yourself to one in the devil's pay?"

All this incoherent talk was spoken at intervals; he rose, sat down,
stood over her as she patiently let him run his tether's length: his
last words were said in an insinuating, and, as well as he could
command, a soft voice, as he pressed her hand in his. She crossed
herself, as she replied, "Our Lady and my cause shall protect me, while
I adventure life fearlessly for its sake! Adieu till then, sir knight:
the saints guard you, and give you better thoughts."

The cavalier proceeded homewards, considering deeply the part he was to
act. He thought of what he might gain or lose by siding with the duke;
and he was angry to find that the image of Monina presented itself even
more vividly, than his ambitious dreams. "God assoil me," thought he. "I
will repeat a paternoster backwards, and so unsay her sorceries. She has
persuaded me, even as my own soul did before, that the best mode to mend
my broken fortunes, and better still to regild my faded escutcheon, is
to join Duke Richard. Yet, after all, this may be mere magic; for once I
will act a wise man's part, and seek old gray-beard, my Lord Fitzwater."

Lord Fitzwater endured impatiently the harsh countenance Henry bore to
him, ever since he had permitted his young rival to escape. Some
question of right and law, which implicated a large portion of his
possessions, had, as he believed, been unjustly decided against him
through the interposition of the king, who, on every occasion, sought to
mortify and injure the old man. He lived as the disgraced and
impoverished servants of a court are wont to live, neglected and
forgotten. He had no family. He loved Robert Clifford better than any
other in the world; and he, when suffering from disappointment or loss,
when his own pain reminded him of that of others, sought his ancient
friend--too seldom to please him with a show of reverence, often enough
to keep alive his affection.

If it were good for him to aid in the replanting of the White Rose, so
also were it well that Lord Fitzwater joined the same party. He talked
even to himself of asking his experienced friend's advice; he really
meant to endeavour to seduce him into a companionship in the projected
rebellion against Henry Tudor. In this spirit he paid his visit; nearly
three months had elapsed since his preceding one. The noble received him
coldly; so at once to break through the ceremony that fettered their
discourse, he cried, "I hear from soft Sir William Stanley, that his
majesty has again said that he will find a way to thank you for a
service you rendered him some six years ago."

"I have long had knowledge of his grace's good memory on that point,"
answered his lordship, angrily; "and yours, methinks, might remind you
of the part you played. By St. Thomas, Robin, I believe you saw further
in the game than I. But what makes the king harp on this out-worn tale?"

"Few know--we may guess. Have you not heard him tell of a new king of
kerns and gallow-glasses? a phantom duke, whose duchy lies without the
English pale in Ireland? a ghost whose very name makes the king's knees
knock together as he sits on the throne? This ruffler, who calls himself
son of Edward the Fourth, the Prince Richard of York, escaped from the
Tower, bears a strange resemblance to the hero of Lisle, Perkin
Warbeck."

"Would, by St. George, he were the same!" exclaimed the noble; "my
dagger should sever the entwined roses, our armed heels tread to dust
the cankered red blossom."

"You speak treason, my lord," said Clifford; "but you speak to a friend.
Let us talk more calmly. I, the playmate of the imprisoned prince, know
that he, Perkin Warbeck, and the Irish hero are the same--this I can
prove: so much for the justice of our cause; as to the expediency,--we,
my good lord, are styled Lancastrians, but our meed therefore is small.
Tudor is a niggard king; Plantagenet, a young and generous adventurer.
What shall we say? Shall Fitzwater and Clifford place the sacred diadem
on this boy's head, and become chiefs in the land where they now pine
obscurely?"

Lord Fitzwater fastened his keen eyes on his companion, while his hand
involuntary grasped his dagger's hilt. "I am not an old man," he cried;
"fifty-seven winters have shed no snows upon my head. I remember when,
at Tewkesbury, I smote an iron-capped yeoman who raised his battle-axe
against our young Edward, and clove the villain to the throat. I can
wield the same weapon--do the same deed now; and I am thrown like a
rusty sword among old armour--refused permission to lead my followers
to Calais. War in France!--it will never be: the word is grown obsolete
in England. Ambassadors thrive instead of valiant captains; crafty
penmanship in lieu of straightforward blows. Art sure, Robin, that this
youth is King Edward's son?"

This was the first step Clifford took; and the eagerness of Fitzwater
quickly impelled him to spread wider the narrow circle of conspirators.
The intelligence, meanwhile, that the king of France had received in
Paris with meet honour a Yorkist pretender to the crown burst at once
over England, spreading wonder and alarm. Some few despised the
pretensions of the youth; the greater number gave to them full and
zealous credence. Many, dreading Henry's sagacity and harshness,
recoiled from every thought rebellious to him; others hailed with joy
the appearance of a rival who would shake his throne, and hold forth
hope of disturbance and change. As yet this was talk merely; nay, there
was more thought, than spoken. Men expected that some other would make
the first move, which would put in play the menacing forces mustered on
either side. Monina saw with joy the work well begun. She remembered the
queen's injunction to seek the Dean of St. Paul's: in acquiring him,
many reverent and powerful partizans were secured. Her presence added to
the interest which the mere name of Richard of York excited. Many who
disbelieved his tale were eager to behold his lovely advocate: they
listened to her syren eloquence, and ranged themselves on her side.
Clifford watched jealously the influence she acquired. When he first saw
her, she had been an untaught girl in comparison with the graceful,
self-possessed being who now moved among them. One feeling in her heart
separated her indeed from the crowd--but this was veiled, even to
herself; and she appeared courteous, benign to all. Clifford often
flattered himself that when she spoke to him her expressions were more
significant, her voice sweeter. He did not love--no, no--his heart
could not entertain the effeminate devotion; but if she loved him, could
saints in heaven reap higher glory? Prompted by vanity, and by an
unavowed impulse, he watched, hung over her, fed upon her words, and
felt that in pleasing her he was for the present repaid for the zeal he
manifested for the duke her friend. Strange he never suspected that she
was animated towards the prince by a deeper feeling. They had lived like
near relations from their childhood; that were sufficient to raise the
flame that shed so bright a light over her soul: that he was a prince,
and she the daughter of a Spanish mariner, forbade their union; and he
paid the just tribute to innocent youth, in not judging of its upright
purity by the distorted reflection his depraved heart presented,
whenever he dared turn his eyes inward.

Foundation was thus laid in England for a momentous combination.
Intelligence from the continent was gathered with keen interest. Early
in December the army of Henry recrossed the Channel: they brought word
of the favour and esteem Richard enjoyed at the French court, of the
zeal of the exiled Yorkists, of their satisfied assurance of his truth.
Next was spread abroad the news of his reception by the dowager duchess
of Burgundy, and the brilliant figure he made at Brussels. What step
would be taken next to advance his cause?

This was a fearful question for the actual king of England. He redoubled
his artful policy, while he wore a mask of mere indifference. The
Yorkists, not yet considerable enough to act openly, or even covertly to
combine for any great attempt, felt fresh bonds thrown over, new and
vexatious tyrannies in exercise against them. This served to unite and
animate their chiefs; they each and all resolved that, when fit
opportunity armed their prince, their swords should at the same moment
leap from the scabbards, darkly to be dyed ere resheathed, or struck
useless from their lifeless hands. The days of St. Alban's and
Tewkesbury passed in all their grim conclusions before their eyes, but
the event was worth the risk: defeated, they lost nothing; victorious,
they exchanged a narrow-hearted, suspicious, exacting tyrant for a
chivalrous and munificent sovereign; Henry Tudor, the abhorred
Lancastrian, for the grandson of York, the lineal heir of Edward the
Third--the true representative of the kings of the glorious and long
line of the Plantaganets.




CHAPTER XX

THE CONSPIRACY


                      Like one lost in a thorny wood,
     That rents the thorns, and is rent with the thorns,
     Seeking a way, and straying from the way;
     Not knowing how to find the open air,
     But toiling desperately to find it out.

                                                   SHAKESPEARE.


In the days of our earlier history, our commerce led us to have more
intercourse with Flanders than with France. That which journeyed slowly
and doubtfully from Paris came in all the heat of a first impression
from the Low Countries. A train had been laid before, which now took
light and blazed through the kingdom. The duchess of Burgundy's
reception of the duke of York, the honours rendered him at her court,
the glad gathering together of the fugitive English, gave pledge of his
truth, and promise of glorious results. Sedition began to spring up in
England on every side; even as, after a mild rain in the birth of the
year, a black, ploughed field is suddenly verdant with the young blades
of wheat. All who had, since the battles of Bosworth and of Stoke, lived
in seclusion or fear; all who from whatever reason had taken sanctuary;
men of ruined fortunes, who desired to escape bondage; came singly or in
small companies to the coast, embarked for the continent, and hastened
to the court of the dowager of Burgundy. All discontented men, who felt
themselves looked coldly on by Tudor, to whom they had yielded the
throne of their native land; many, whom it grieved and vexed to see the
world stagnate in changeless peace, desirous of novelty and glad of any
pretence that called them into activity, dashed headlong into revolt;
nor were there few, chiefly indeed among the nobility, who had lamented
the fall of the House of York, and hailed gladly this promise of its
resuscitation. The common adventurers and soldiers of fortune acted on
their single separate resolves; the noble adherents of the White Rose
drew together, that there might be plan and strength in their schemes.
They were cautious, for their enemy was crafty and powerful; they were
resolute, for they hated him.

Out, far in the low flats bordering the river Lea, there stood, in a
marshy hollow, a straggling village, now effaced from the landscape. At
its extremity was a solid, but gloomy, square brick house, surrounded by
a moat, which the low watery soil easily filled, even to overflow; and
the superfluity was received in a deep stagnant pool at the back of the
mansion. The damp atmosphere had darkened the structure, and thrown a
mantle of green moss and speckled lichen over the bricks. Its
fantastically carved and heavy portal yawned like a black cavern's
mouth, and added to the singularly desolate appearance of the mansion.
The village was but half inhabited, and looked as struck by poverty and
discomfort. The house belonged to the Clifford family. It had been
built, it was said, in Henry the Fifth's time, when Sir Roger Clifford,
a stern old man, following his sovereign to the wars, shut up here his
beautiful young wife, so to insure her fidelity during his absence.
Among her peers and gentle companions, the Lady Clifford had doubtless
been true to the bond that linked her to her lord; but, alone in this
solitary mansion, surrounded by ill-natured peasants, pining for her
father's pleasant halls, and her girlish enjoyments, no wonder that she
found her state intolerable. Age and jealousy are ill mates for youth
and sprightliness, and suspicion easily begets that which it abhors even
to imagine. One who had loved her in her virgin days introduced himself
into her suite; the brief months of stolen happiness passed by, and the
green stagnant pool was, they said, the cold sepulchre of the betrayed
lovers. Since then, during the wars of York and Lancaster, this house
had been the resort of Clifford's followers: and, when the White Rose
became supreme, that alone of the family possessions had not been
forfeited to the crown: it was the last relic of Sir Robert's fortunes.
His few tenantry, hard pressed for rent to satisfy his necessities, had
deserted their abodes; the green acres had passed into other hands; a
band of poor cotters alone remained, and this old house haunted by the
ghosts of those who slept beneath the waveless pool, dilapidated,
disfurnished. Yet here the wild knight had held lawless carousals;
hither he sometimes fled to hide after some ruinous loss, or when he was
pursued by those who sought to avenge insults committed during drunken
brawls.

Now it would seem some orgie was meditated: liveried servants, one or
two only bearing Clifford's coat, the rest wearing different badges, as
belonging to different masters, had arrived during the previous day.
Some of the ruined huts were pulled down to supply firewood, and the old
chimnies sent out volumes of smoke; various carts, laden, some with
eatables, fat bucks, young calves, pheasants, hares, and partridges,
piles of bread, seven hooped casks of wine, were unladen in the
mildew-stained hall. Other carts followed the first, bearing bedding,
apparel, furniture, and, it was whispered by the idling villagers, arms.
Several apartments were strewed thick with rushes, and the blazing
fires, in spite of the tattered plaster and stained ceilings, imparted
cheerfulness to the rooms. There was need of internal warmth; a thick
snow-storm fell, sheeting the low fields, which, uninterspersed by
trees, now looked doubly wild and drear. The waters of the moat and pool
were frozen; a sharp north wind whistled round the house. For the first
time for many years its poor dependents were cheered during the severe
season by the crumbs, or rather large portions of superfluous food, from
the mansion of their landlord.

The first guest that arrived came in a close litter, attended by a
Moorish servant, and Clifford himself on horseback. Monina had forgotten
her Flemish home: bright Andalusia--its orange groves, myrtle and
geranium hedges, the evergreen forests which embowered Alcala, and the
fertile laughing Vega of Granada, formed her image of such portions of
fair earth, as, unencumbered by houses, afforded on its green and
various surface sustenance to his inhabitants. She shivered before the
northern blast, and gazed appalled on the white plain, where the
drifting snow shifted in whole showers as the wind passed over it. The
looks of the people, sallow, ill-clothed, and stupid, made her turn from
contemplating them, as she yet answered the contemptuous and plaintive
remarks of her Spanish attendant in a cheerful, deprecating voice.

For two successive days other guests continued to arrive. They were
chiefly men of note, yet came attended by few domestics. There was Lord
Fitzwater, dissatisfied at the part of rebel he was forced, he thought,
to play; and on that account he was louder than any against King Henry.
Sir Simon Mountford was a Yorkist of the days of Edward the Fourth; he
personally hated Richmond, and looked on Richard's as a sacred cause.
Sir Thomas Thwaites had been a friend of the earl of Rivers, and gladly
seized this occasion to avenge his death, attributable to the dastardly
policy of Henry. William Daubeny was attached to the earl of Warwick,
and entered warmly into projects whose success crowned his freedom. Sir
Robert Ratcliffe, cousin of Lord Fitzwater, had lived in poor disguise
since the battle of Stoke, and gladly threw off his peasant's attire to
act the soldier again in a new war of the Roses. Sir Richard Lessey had
been chaplain to the household of Edward the Fourth. Sir William
Worseley, dean of St. Paul's, was a rare instance of gratitude outliving
the period of receiving benefits; he had been a creature, and was a
sincere mourner, of the late queen. Many others, clergy and laity,
entered the plot; a thousand different motives impelled them to one line
of conduct, and brought them to Clifford's moated house, to conspire the
overthrow of Tudor, and the exaltation of the duke of York to the
throne. One only person invited to this assembly failed. Sir William
Stanley; each voice was loud against his tergiversation, and Clifford's
whispered sarcasm cut deeper than all.

The debates and consultations lasted three days. After infinite
confusion and uncertainty, the deliberations brought forth conclusions
that were resolved upon unanimously. First, the house they then
occupied, and the village, was to be a repository for arms, a rendezvous
for the recruits of the cause. The conspirators levied a tax on
themselves, and collected some thousand pounds to be remitted to the
prince. They regulated a system, whose object was to re-awaken
party-spirit in England, and to quicken into speedy growth the seeds of
discontent and sedition, which Henry's avarice and extortion had sown
throughout the land. Those who possessed estates and followers were to
organize troops. At last, they deputed two of their number to go over to
the duchess of Burgundy, and to carry their offers of service to her
royal nephew. The two selected for this purpose were, first, Sir Robert
Clifford, who had known the duke formerly, and who, it was supposed,
would be peculiarly welcome to him; and secondly, Master William Barley,
a man advanced in years; he had combated in nearly all the twelve
pitched and sanguinary battles that were fought between York and
Lancaster. He had been a boy-servitor to the old duke of York, a yeoman
of Edward's guard, a halberdier in Richard the Third's time. He had been
left for dead on the field of Bosworth, but came to life again to appear
at the battle of Stoke. He had risen in the world, and was a man of
substance and reputation: he was not noble; but he was rich, zealous,
and honest.

The meeting lasted three days, and then gradually dispersed. All had
gone well. An assembly, whose individuals were noble, wealthy, or
influential, united to acknowledge Richard as their liege. Foreign
potentates declared for him; and hope was high in every bosom at all
these forerunners of success. Monina's enthusiastic heart beat with
ecstasy. Young, the innocent child of unsophisticated impulse, her
gladness showed itself in wild spirits and unconstrained expressions of
exultation. She and Clifford returned to London together, for he
contrived tacitly and unsuspected by her, to install himself as her
habitual escort. Happy in expectation of her beloved friend's success,
she talked without reserve; and the genius, which was her soul's
essence, gave power and fascination to everything she said. She spoke of
Spain, of Richard's adventures there, of her father and his voyages. The
name of Columbus was mentioned; and the New World--source of wondrous
conjecture. They spoke of the desolate waste of waters that hems in the
stable earth--of the golden isles beyond: to all these subjects Monina
brought vivid imagery, and bright painting, creations of her own quick
fancy. Clifford had never before held such discourse. In hours of
sickness or distaste, at moments of wild exhilaration, when careering on
a high-mettled horse beneath the stars of night, fanned by a strong but
balmy wind, he had conceived ideas allied to the lofty aspirations of
our nature; but he cast them off as dreams, unworthy of a wise man's
attention. The melodious voice of Monina, attuned by the divine impulses
of her spirit, as the harp of the winds by celestial breezes, raised a
commotion in his mind, such as a prophetess of Delphi felt when the
oracular vapour rose up to fill her with sacred fury. A word, a single
word, was a potent northern blast to dash aside the mist, and to
re-apparel the world in its, to him, naked, barren truth. So fervently,
and so sweetly did she speak of Richard, that Clifford's burning heart
was in a moment alight with jealousy; and the love he despised, and
thought he mastered, became his tyrant, when it allied itself to his
evil passions. He looked angry, he spoke sharply--Monina was
astonished; but his libellous insinuations fell innocuous on her pure
mind: she only felt that she feared him, half-disliked him, and,
trembling and laughing as she spoke, said, "Well, well; I will not care
for your angry mood. You are going soon: ere you return, our prince
will, by his own bright example, have taught you better things. Learn
from him diligently, sir knight, for he is all courtesy and nobleness."

Clifford laughed bitterly, and a base resolve of lowering the
high-hearted York to his own degrading level arose in his breast: it was
all chaos there as yet; but the element, which so lately yielded to a
regular master-wind of ambition, was tossed in wild and hideous waves
by--we will not call the passion love--by jealousy, envy, and growing
hate. Short interval was allowed for the gathering of the storm; he was
soon called upon to fulfil his commission, and to accompany Master
William Barley on their important embassy to Brussels.

The scene here presented, operated a considerable change on these
personages; arriving from England, where the name of the White Rose was
whispered, and every act in his favour was hid in the darkness of
skulking conspiracy, to his court at Brussels, where noble followers
clustered round him, and the duchess, with a woman's tact and a woman's
zeal, studied how best to give importance and splendour to his person
and pretensions. The spirit of the Yorkist party, in spite of her
natural mildness, still glowed in the bosom of this daughter of Henry
the Sixth's unhappy rival,--the child of disaster, and bride of frantic
turbulence. Opposed to the remorseless Louis the Eleventh, struggling
with the contentious insolence of the free towns of Flanders, war
appeared to her the natural destiny of man, and she yielded to its
necessity, while her gentle heart sorrowed over the misery which it
occasioned.

She first received Clifford and Barley; and with the winning grace of a
sovereign, solicited for her nephew their affection and support: then
she presented them to him--this was the fair-haired, blue-eyed boy,
whom Clifford saved, the gentle, noble-looking being, whose simplicity
awed him; whose bright smile said, "I reign over every heart." The
knight shrunk into himself: how had he dyed his soul in a worldliness
which painted his countenance in far other colours.--He was not
deficient in grace: his dark-grey eyes, veiled by long lashes, were in
themselves exceedingly handsome: the variableness of his face, traced
with many unseasonable lines, yet gave him the power of assuming a
pleasing expression; and his person, though diminutive, was eminently
elegant, while his self-possession and easy address, covered a multitude
of faults. Now, his first resolve was to insinuate himself into
Richard's affections; to become a favourite; and consequently to lead
him blindly on the path he desired he should tread.

The prince's spirits were high; his soul exulted in the attachment of
others, in the gratitude that animated him. Until Clifford's arrival
(Edmund was for the time in England), Sir George Neville, among his new
friends, held the first place. He was proud and reserved; but his
aristocracy was so blended with honour, his reserve with perfect
attention and deference to the feeling of others, that it was impossible
not to esteem him, and find pleasure in his society. Clifford and
Neville made harsh discord together. Richard, inexperienced in the
world, sought to harmonize that which never could accord: Neville drew
back; and Clifford's good humour, and apparent forbearance, made him
appear to advantage.

At this period ambassadors from Henry arrived at Brussels: they had been
expected; and as a measure of precaution, Richard left that place before
their arrival, and took up his temporary abode at Audenarde, a town
which made part of the dowry of the Duchess Margaret. All the English,
save Lady Brampton, attended him to his retreat. The ambassadors, in
their audience with the archduke, demanded the expulsion of Richard from
the Low Countries, taunting the duchess with her support of the
notorious impostor, Lambert Simnel, and speaking of the duke of York as
a fresh puppet of her own making. They received the concise reply--that
the gentleman she recognized as her nephew, inhabited the territory of
her dowry, of which she was sovereign, and over which the archduke had
no jurisdiction: however, that no disturbance might occur in their
commercial relations, which would have roused all Flanders to rebellion,
Maximilian was obliged to temporize, and to promise to afford no aid to
the illustrious exile.

Their audience accomplished, the ambassadors had only to return. They
remained but one night at Brussels: on this night. Sir Edward Poynings
and Doctor Wattam, who fulfilled this mission, were seated over a cup of
spiced wine, in discourse concerning these strange events, the Lady
Margaret's majestic demeanour, and the strangeness of her supporting
this young man, if indeed he were an impostor; when a cavalier, whose
soiled dress and heated appearance bespoke fatigue and haste, entered
the room. It was Sir Robert Clifford: they received him as liege
subjects may receive a traitor, with darkened brows and serious looks.
Clifford addressed them in his usual careless style:--"Saint Thomas
shield me, my masters; can you not afford one benison to your gossip!
Good Sir Edward, we have ruffled together, when we wore both white and
red in our caps; and does the loss of a blood-stained rag degrade me
from your friendship?"

The bitter accusations of the knight, and the doctor's sarcasms, which
were urged in reply, awoke a haughty smile. "Oh, yes!" he cried, "ye are
true men, faithful liege subjects! I, an inheritance of the block,
already marked for quartering, because I am for the weak right, you for
the strong might. Right, I say--start not--the mother of God be my
witness! Duke Richard is Duke Richard--is lord of us all--true son of
the true king, Ned of the White Rose, whom you swore to protect,
cherish, and exalt; you, yes, even you, sir knight. Where is now your
oath? cast from heaven, to pave the hell where you will reap the meed of
your lying treachery!"

Clifford, always insolent, was doubly so now that he felt accused of
crimes of which he did not deem himself guilty; but which would (so an
obscure presentiment told him) hereafter stain his soul. Doctor Wattam
interposed before Poyning's rising indignation: "Wherefore come you
here, Sir Robert?" he asked. "Though we are envoys of the king you have
betrayed, we may claim respect: Sir Edward, as a gentleman and a
cavalier--I as an humble servitor of the Lord Jesus, in whose name I
command you not to provoke to a bloody deed the messengers of peace."

"Cease to taunt me with a traitor's name," replied Sir Robert, "and I
will chafe no further the kindling blood of my sometime friend. Let us
rather leave all idle recrimination. I came hither to learn how wagged
the world in London town, and, as a piece of secret intelligence, to
assure you that you wrongfully brand this stripling for an impostor. Be
he sovereign of our land or not--be it right or wrong to side with York
against Lancaster--York he is, the son of Edward and Elizabeth, so
never fail me my good sword or my ready wits!"

The best of us are inclined to curiosity. A little fearful of each
other, the ambassadors exchanged looks, to know whether either would
accuse the other of treachery if they heard further. "Good sir," said
the doctor, gravely, "methinks we do our liege service in listening to
this gentleman. We can the better report to his majesty on what grounds
the diabolic machination is founded."

So, over another goblet, Clifford sat telling them how Richard had long
lived as Perkin Warbeck in the neighbourhood of Tournay, under the
guardianship of Madeline de Faro; and he recounted the history of his
escape from the hands of Frion. Doctor Wattam carefully conned these
names; and then, in reply, he set forth how unworthy it was of a
Clifford to desert from Lancaster; how unlikely, even if it were true,
which, after all his tale hardly proved it was, that the outcast boy
could compete with success with the sage possessor of England's throne.
Poynings asked him how it pleased him to find himself at the same board
with a Neville and a Taylor, and hinted that an exile from his country
and a traitor to his sovereign, this was hardly the way to replenish his
purse, or to gain anew the broad lands he had lost. The service he might
do Henry by a return to his duty, gratitude and reward, were then urged
by the priest, while Clifford listened in dodged silence. His brow
became flushed; his lips worked with internal commotion. He felt, he
knew, that he hated the very man hose cause he espoused; but he was
pledged to so many, a whole array of noble and respected names came
before him.--Could he, in the eyes of these, become a false foul
traitor? He refilled, and quaffed again and again his cup; and at last
so wound himself up, as to begin, "My friends, you speak sooth, though I
may not listen; yet, if you name one so humble and distasteful, say to
my liege--"

A page in green and white--the colours of Lady Brampton--entered,
announcing her speedy arrival. Clifford's wits were already disturbed by
wine; instinct made him fear in such a state to come in contact with the
subtle lady; he drew his cap over his eyes, his cloak around his person,
and vanished from the hall, ere his friends were aware of his intention.

The interview between Lady Brampton and the gentlemen was of another
sort. Sir Edward had in her younger days worn her colours. She was
changed in person since then: but, when, after a short interval, he got
over the shock consequent on the first perception of the sad traces of
time on the cheek of beauty, he found that her eyes possessed the same
fire, her voice the same thrilling tone, her smile the same enchantment.
While the doctor, who had loved her as a daughter, and she regarded him
with filial reverence, rebuked her for what he termed her misdeeds; she
replied with vivacity, and such true and zealous love for him whose
cause she upheld, that they were both moved to listen with respect, if
not conviction, to her asseverations. She could not gain her point, nor
win them over to her side; but, when she departed, neither spoke of
young Richard's rights, unwilling to confess to one another that they
were converts to his truth. She went. The next day they departed from
Brussels, and it became subject of discussion, what step Henry would now
take, and whether, by any new measure, he could disturb the ripening
conspiracy against his throne.




CHAPTER XXI

TREASON


     Oh, what excuse can my invention make?

     I do arrest ye of high treason here!

                                        SHAKSPEARE.


Henry's ambassadors had wrought little change on any except Clifford.
His words had been interrupted; they were nothing in themselves; but
their spirit, the spirit of treason, was in his heart. He made up his
mind to nothing; he looked forward to no certain project; but he felt
that hereafter he might betray his present associates to their
arch-enemy. As yet his conscience was not seared; the very anticipation
of guilt tortured him, and he longed to fly from thought. Another blind
impulse drove him on. He hated the prince, because he was his opposite;
because, while he was a cankered bloom, his heart a waste, his soul
crusted over by deceit, his very person sullied by evil deeds and
thoughts, Duke Richard stood in all the pride of innocence. Could he
degrade him to his own level, there would be a pang the less in his
bosom; could he injure him in the eyes of his friends, render him, as he
himself had ever been, an object of censure, he would satisfy the
ill-cravings of his nature, and do Henry a wondrous benefit by
tarnishing the high character his rival bore, causing him whom his
adherents set up as an idol, to become a reproach to them.

Clifford thought that it would be an easy task to entice a gay young
stripling into vice. Richard loved hawking, hunting, and jousting in the
lists, almost more, some of his elder friends thought, than befitted one
on the eve of a perilous enterprise. Governed by Edmund, attended by
Neville, watched by the noble duchess and vigilant Lady Brampton, it was
no great wonder that he had hitherto escaped error; but Clifford went
wilily to work, and hoped in some brief luckless hour to undo the work
of years. Richard was glad to find in him a defender of his inclination
for manly sports; an intimacy sprung up between them, which it would not
be the knight's fault, if it did not bring about the catastrophe he
desired.

What then perpetually opposed all his measures? What, when he thought
he had caused the tide of temptation to flow, suddenly made it ebb and
retreat back to its former banks? Clifford, an adept in every art,
moulded himself to every needful form, and at last won the secret from
the deep recess of Richard's heart; he loved--he loved Monina, that
living emblem of innocent affection; never, he had vowed, would he
disturb the sacred calm that reigned in her young heart, nor gift
ignorance with fatal knowledge. She knew not the nature of her own
feelings, and he would not withdraw the veil; but he was himself
conscious of being swayed by the tenderest love. He could not marry her;
his own misfortunes had arisen from the misalliance of his father; she
herself would have refused to injure thus his cause, and have disdained
him, if for her sake he had been inclined to abdicate his rights; he
would be her friend, her brother. With passion came sorrow; he fled
from sad reflection to the chase, to the exercise of arms. But other
temptation became blunted by this very sentiment; his love grew more
ardent by restraint; if he yielded in her absence to the contemplation
of her image, his soul was filled with a voluptuous languor, from which
he roused himself by attention to his duties or hardy pastimes; but to
every other form of pleasure he was cold. This was a strange,
incomprehensible picture to present to the world-worn Clifford; he
fancied that it must be a delusion, but he found all the resistance of
firm reality. To embitter his defeat came his own fierce passions, and
the knowledge that Monina loved his rival; they would see each other, be
happy in each other, and laugh him to scorn! He concealed his jealousy,
his disappointment; but double treble rage gnawed at his heart; hatred
awoke in her most viperous shape, fanged by a sense of inferiority,
envenomed by envy, sharpened by the torture of defeat. How little did
any know--above all, how not at all did his innocent victim
suspect--the storm that brooded in his heart! There was something in
the very slightness and grace of his figure that was at variance with
the idea of violence and crime; and his glossing tongue added to the
deceit. Lady Brampton feared him a little; Frion saw something in him,
that made him pay greater court to him than to any other--these were
the only indications. Sunshine and calm brooded over the earthquake's
birth.

Meanwhile, Henry was not sleeping at his post. He saw the full extent of
his danger, and exerted all his energy to provide against it. His
immediate attention was chiefly directed to two points. In the first
place it was desirable to forge some tale, to account for the
circumstances that spoke so loudly for the truth of York's story, and
thus to degrade him from the high esteem in which he was universally
held; secondly, it became necessary to certify to the public the death
of Edward the Fifth and his brother in the Tower. We may well wonder at
his ill success as to the first point;--there never was concocted so
ill-fangled, so incongruous, and so contradictory a fable, as that put
together by Henry, purporting to be the history of the pretender. He was
himself ashamed of it, and tried to call it in. History has in its
caprice given more credence to this composition, than its contemporaries
gave; it was ridiculed and despised at the time even by the partisans of
Lancaster.

He was equally unfortunate in his second effort. To explain his attempts
we must go back to the time of Richard the Third. On repeated reports
being made to him of his unhappy imprisoned nephew's illness, this
monarch had commissioned Sir James Tirrel to visit him. The young prince
had languished without any appearance of immediate danger, and then
suddenly drooped even to the grave. Tirrel arrived at the Tower late in
the evening, and the first intelligence he received was, that the Lord
Edward was dying. At the midnight hour he was admitted into his
sick-room; his two attendants followed him no further than the
ante-chamber. He entered. The glazed eye and death-pale cheek of the
victim spoke of instant dissolution; a few slight convulsions, and it
was over--Edward was no more! With wild, loud cries poor little York
threw himself on his brother's body. Tirrel's servants, affrighted,
entered; they found one of the princes, whose illness had been
represented as trivial, dead; the other was carried off, struggling and
screaming, by their master and an attendant priest, the only two persons
in the chamber. They departed two hours afterwards from the Tower.
Tirrel seemed disturbed, and was silent. They would perhaps have thought
less about it; but hearing subsequently of the disappearance and
supposed death of the young duke, wonder grew into suspicion, and in
thoughtless talk they laid the foundation of a dire tale out of these
fragments. Henry had heard it before; now he endeavoured to trace its
origin. Tirrel, who for some time had lived obscurely in the country,
came to London--he was immediately seized, and thrown into prison.
Emissaries were set to work to find the three others, the priest and Sir
James's two servants. Only one was to be found; and when Tirrel was
asked concerning this man, by name John Dighton, he told a tale of
ingratitude punished by him, which was soothing sweet to King Henry's
ear; he was speedily discovered and imprisoned. Both master and follower
underwent many examinations: and it was suggested to each, that reward
would follow their giving countenance to a tale of midnight murder.
Tirrel was indignant at the proposal; Dighton, on the contrary--a
needy, bad man--while he told the story so as to gloss his own conduct,
was very ready to inculpate his master; and it grew finely under his
fosterage. Henry saw that without Tirrel's connivance he could not
authenticate any account; but he gave all the weight he could to these
reports. Few persons believed them, yet it served to confuse and
complicate events; and, while people argued, some at least would take
his side of the question, and these would be interested to spread their
belief abroad;--Duke Richard must be the loser in every way.

The spies, the traitor-emissaries of the fear-struck monarch, were all
busy; there was a whole army of them dispersed in England and
Flanders--none could know the false man from the true. To obviate every
suspicion, he caused his own hirelings to be proclaimed traitors, and
cursed at St. Paul's cross.

The priests, ever his friends, were impiously permitted to violate the
sacrament of confession; and thus several unsuspecting men betrayed
their lives, while they fancied that they performed a religious duty. A
few names still escaped him--he tampered with Clifford and Frion for
them: the former was not yet quite a villain; the latter found that he
enjoyed more credit, honour, and power as the duke's secretary than he
could do as Henry's spy; besides, his vanity was hurt--he wished to
revenge himself on the master who had discarded him.

In nothing did Henry succeed better than in throwing an impenetrable
veil over his manœuvres. Most people thought, so tranquil and
unconcerned he seemed, that he did not suspect the existence of an
actual conspiracy, fostered in England itself, containing many
influential persons among its numbers. All were sure that he was
entirely ignorant of their names and actual purposes. The many months
which intervened while he waited patiently, corroborated this belief,
and the conspirators slept in security. The winter passed, and they
continued to scheme, apparently unobserved; spring came--they prepared
for York's landing--for a general rising--for a sudden seizing on many
walled towns and fortresses--for the occupation of London itself. A few
brief weeks, and Henry's prosperity would be shaken to its centre--his
power uprooted--he and his children would wander exiles in a foreign
land; and another king, the gallant descendant of the true Plantagenets,
reign in his stead.

Thus occupied, thus prepared, were the Yorkists in England; at Brussels,
things were carried on more openly, and wore a more promising
appearance. The duchess, Lady Brampton, Plantagenet, triumphed. Sir
George Neville anticipated with proud joy a restoration of the fallen
race of Warwick, and regarded himself already as another king-maker of
that house. Every exile looked northward, and grew joyful with the
thought of home. Frion became more busy and important than ever; he had
lately gone disguised to England, in pursuance of some project. In
another week they expected Lord Barry to join them from Ireland:
Clifford was amazed, vacillating, terrified. He knew that Henry was far
from idle; he was aware that some of the loudest speakers in Richard's
favour in Brussels were his hirelings, whom he would not betray, because
he half felt himself one among them, though he could not quite prevail
on himself to join their ranks. He believed that the king was in eager
expectation of his decision in his favour; that nothing could be done
till he said the word; he proposed conditions; wished to conceal some
names; exempt others from punishment. Messengers passed continually
between him and bishop Morton, Henry's chief counsellor and friend, and
yet he could not determine to be altogether a traitor.

Thus stood affairs; a consummation all thought to be nigh at hand. It
was the spring of 1494, and the coming summer was to decide the fate of
York. A ball was given by the duchess, in honour of her nephew; it was
splendidly and gaily attended. Clifford had been conversing with the
prince, when suddenly he left the apartment: it was long ere he came
back, and slowly joined the principal group in the room, consisting of
the duchess, the prince. Lady Brampton, Neville, Plantagenet, Taylor,
and several others. Clifford's countenance was marked by horror and
surprise; so much so, that Lady Brampton looked at him a moment without
knowing him. Suddenly she started up and seized his arm--"Holy Virgin!"
she cried, "what had dressed your face, Sir Robert, in this pale livery?
what tale of death have you heard?"

The brow of Clifford became flushed, his lips grew whiter, as quivering
they refused to form the words he attempted to utter. Barley had before
this quitted the apartment: he rushed in now, crying aloud, "Treason!"

"Treason!" Neville repeated, laying his hand heavily on Clifford's
shoulder; "hear you that word, sir knight? Where is the traitor?"

Clifford in a moment recovered himself, answering, composedly, "Ay,
would I could point out the man--would that I could drag him forth, the
mark, the very target for the shafts of vengeance. We are lost; the
cause is lost; our friends; the good Lord Fitzwater. I would have hid
his name in the bowels of the earth!"

Already the festal hall was deserted; already the guests were dispersed,
to learn how wide the destruction had spread. By the prince's orders,
the messenger from England was introduced before himself and his
principal friends: it was Adam Floyer, Sir Simon Mountford's chaplain;
escaped himself, he was the bearer of a frightful tale. On one day,
almost at the same hour, the Yorkist conspirators were arrested. Lord
Fitzwater, Sir Simon Mountford, Sir Thomas Thwaites, Robert Ratcliffe,
William Daubeny, Thomas Cressenor, Thomas Astwood, two dominicans, by
name William Richford and Thomas Poyns, Doctor William Sutton, Worseley
the dean of Saint Paul's, Robert Langborne, and Sir William Lessey, were
all seized and cast into prison. Others had escaped: young Gilbert
Daubeny, brother of William, and Sir Edward Lisle, had arrived in
Flanders. Others made good speed and had fled to Ireland.




CHAPTER XXII

HERMAN DE FARO


     Oh, Clifford! but bethink thee once again,
     And in thy thought o'errun my former time,
     And if thou canst for blushing, view this face!

                                                 SHAKSPEARE.


"Where is the traitor?" Neville's question resounded through Flanders,
and was re-echoed in groans from the English shores. Each man feared the
other, and saw the mark of Henry's malice on the brow of all. It was a
worse scene in England: executions followed imprisonment; the scaffolds
flowed with blood; and suspicion was still greedy of prey. Among the
papers seized by the king there was found a letter from Clifford to Lord
Fitzwater, containing these words: "I do protest, my lord, that the
proof of York's truth is most pertinent. You know this; and yet he who
cut the crooked rose-bush to the roots still doubts; forsooth, he is
still at his 'ifs'--'if he were sure that young man were King
Edward's son, he would never bear arms against him.' Pray deprive my
lord of his 'if;' for arms he must never bear: he is too principal to
any cause."

Henry tormented himself to find who this doubter might be: again he
sought to bribe Clifford, who was at first dogged that so much was done
without him, and then tried to barter his intelligence for Lord
Fitzwater's life. Such grace had he left, that he was ready to exert his
wits to save his former patron; this was granted. This noble alone of
the conspirators who were laymen was spared: he was sent prisoner to
Calais.

At the first word of discovery, Monina's friends had endeavoured to
insure her escape to Flanders; but her name was known to Henry, and
there was none whom he was more desirous to get into his power. She
remained concealed at a little distance from London. She grew mad in
inaction: the work of death and misery around wound up her tender spirit
to torture; and the execution of her former friends filled her with such
horror as made day hateful, night the parent of frightful visions. After
several weeks' seclusion, she all at once resolved to visit London, to
seek some one of her former friends--to learn whether the tragedy was
over, and what further mischiefs despair might have engendered. She
inhabited a solitary mansion, with one old woman, who opposed her going,
but vainly. Monina was too young to bear uncertainty with any degree of
patience. Some slight joy visited her as she found herself on her road
to London. Before she arrived a heavy rain fell; but she was not to be
discouraged. Sir Edward Lisle, she knew, had not been arrested: she was
unaware of his escape, and thought perhaps that he had not been
discovered; she might get intelligence from him. His house was deserted
and empty. Another hope remained--Sir William Stanley. She knew his
timidity, and resolved to be cautious as to the manner of her visit. Sir
William had ever been peculiarly kind to the gentle maiden; fearing to
see her openly, she had often come to him by water: his mansion, near
the palace at Westminster, had a garden upon the Thames. Without
exciting any remark, she could land here. It was already night, and this
favoured secrecy. With some difficulty, in the city, where she then was,
she contrived to find her way to an obscure wharf, and embarked in a
wherry. Fortunately it was high water, and she landed without difficulty
in the garden, and dismissed the men. Now she began, to be puzzled as to
how she should make her way, dripping with rain, unexpected, to Sir
William's presence. She had been accustomed to be admitted by a little
door opening on stairs which led her to her old friend's library: this
was shut now. Suddenly she thought she heard voices, and then perceived
a thread of light that streamed through the key-hole of the summer-house
in the garden. There was a noise on the water, too: and a boat was
paddled to the landing-place. Bewildered, yet believing that all this
secrecy was connected with the grand conspiracy, she moved towards the
summer-house: the door was opened, and the light falling full upon her,
she saw several figures within, and a female shriek burst upon her ear.
Quick steps were heard behind: to retreat or go forward equally
terrified her; when one of the persons in the summer-house, a man in an
uncouth foreign garb, cried, "Thou here, Monina! What miracle is this?
Come, come in; there is danger in all we do!"

Monina recognized the voice of Frion, and entered: there she saw one, a
lady richly attired, yet half disguised in a large black cloak. Fear was
painted on her cheek; her blue eyes were cast up to Heaven. A female
attendant with her seemed yet more terrified. About the room were
scattered globes and astrolabes, and all the gear of an astrologer. In
the lady, Monina recognized York's sister, Tudor's queen, the fair
Elizabeth of England. At once compassion and respect entered her heart:
she addressed the royal lady with reverence, and all that touching grace
that was her sweetest charm; she assured her of inviolable secrecy; she
reminded her of their former interview. Elizabeth grew calmer as she
recognized her visitor at Shene: she stretched out her hand to the
Spaniard, saying, "I do indeed believe and trust thee; thou shalt hear
again from me." Then folding her mantle round her, and leaning on her
attendant, she quitted the house, and with trembling haste embarked.

For many weeks after this scene, Monina continued concealed in Sir
William Stanley's mansion. When the arrest of the conspirators had taken
place, Frion, balked in an attempt to escape, for safety's sake had
assumed the habit and character of an astrologer, and so far worked upon
Stanley's fears, and won him by his flattery, that he permitted him to
take up his residence in his summer-house. Frion was a clever prophet,
and too restless not to become notorious. It was a good mode, he
averred, to put hope in the hearts of the Yorkists, by prognosticating
all manner of success to them. His fame spread. The queen questioned
Stanley about his new astrologer; and the confusion the poor chamberlain
evinced, served only to excite her curiosity. She sent one of her
attendants to see what manner of man he might be; and the subtle Frion
profited by this little artifice, which Sir William in his terror
divulged, to entice the queen herself to his cell. She came, and the
result of her visit was to bring Monina again before her.

Such were the agents still at work for York in London. Such the
materials Clifford strove to mould into a purpose of his own. There was
no reason, so many of the White Rose thought, to forego all their plans
because one had come to a fatal end. Still Richard might land in
England, and make head against Tudor. On a smaller scale, with lessened
hopes and diminished ardour, a scheme of this kind was canvassed.
Clifford appeared its chief abettor, and encouraged it by every means in
his power; none were averse. It was not an enterprise of such high
expectation as the discovered one; but, undertaken with speed, and
prosecuted with energy, it might turn out as well. England was by no
means tranquil; the metropolis itself was the scene of tumults: these
were raised to a ferment by the embargo Henry had found it necessary to
place on all communication with Holland--a measure fraught with ruin to
many of the richest merchants in London.

At this time, towards the end of the summer, the king came up from his
palace at Shene, and held a court at Westminster. One of the immediate
subjects that brought him up, was a tumult in the city, to which the
embargo had given rise. A vast number of apprentices and journeymen
belonging to the ruined merchants were out of employ, while the traders
from Hans, and other free German towns, who went among us by the name of
the Easterlings, got the commerce into their own hands, and grew rich
upon it. The sight of their prosperity was, to the starving Londoners,
as the pressed rowel of a spur in a horse's side; with the usual
barbarism of the untaught and rude, they visited on these men the fault
of their governors--the discontent augmented till it became loud,
furious, and armed. Multitudes of those deprived of their usual means,
met, and, in a moment of rage, proceeded from words to acts. They
endeavoured to force and rifle the warehouses of the Easterlings, who
repulsed them with difficulty; nor did they disperse, till the mayor
arrived with men and weapons, from whom they fled like a flock of sheep.
When tidings of this event were brought to Henry, he, who saw in all
things the multiplied image of the abhorred White Rose, believed the
Yorkists to be its secret cause. The day after his arrival he gave
audience to the mayor, who reported that, from every examination made,
none appeared to have a part in it, except servants and apprentices,
nearly a hundred of whom were imprisoned in the Tower.

In giving a detail of this circumstance, the mayor related that the
Easterlings declared, that at the first onset their richest
store-chambers must have become the prey of the rioters, but for the
interposition of one man. He was a sea-captain, and had arrived but the
day before with his caravel from Spain--they represented him as a
person of gigantic stature and superhuman strength. Entangled by the
mob in his progress through the city, he had no sooner discovered their
intent, than he contrived to make his way into the stilyard; and there
combining the forces of the defenders, more by his personal prowess than
any other means, he beat back the invaders, and succeeded in closing the
gates. At the representation of the mayor, Henry commanded that this man
should be brought before him, partly that he might thank him for his
services, and partly, for Henry was curious on such points, to learn
from him the news from Spain, and if more had been heard of the wild
visionary Columbus and his devoted crew, since they had deserted the
stable continent, to invade the hidden chambers of the secret western
ocean.

The king received the mariner in his closet. None were in attendance
save Urswick. There was something grand in the contrast between these
men. The courtier-priest--the sovereign, whose colourless face was
deep-lined with careful thought, whose eyes were skilled in reading the
thoughts of men, and whose soul was perpetually alive to everything that
was passing around him--and the ocean rock, the man of tempests and
hardships, whose complexion was darkened and puckered by exposure to sun
and wind, whose every muscle was hardened by labour, but whose unservile
mien bespoke no cringing to any power, save nature's own. He received
Henry's thanks with respect, and replied simply: he answered also
several questions put to him concerning his voyages; it appeared that he
had but lately arrived from Spain--that he came to seek a relative who
resided in England. During this interview a thought flashed on Henry's
mind. In his late transactions with Clifford, the base purpose had been
formed of enticing the duke and his principal adherents to England, and
of delivering them up to their enemy; there had been some discussion as
to providing, at least, one vessel in Henry's pay, to make part of the
little fleet which would bring the duke of York over. This was
difficult, as suspicion might attach itself to any English vessel; but
here was one, with a stranger captain, and a foreign crew, a man who
knew nothing of White or Red Rose, who would merely fulfil his
commission. Slow on all occasions to decide, the king appointed another
interview with the stranger.

It so happened, that the news of the appearance of the Spanish captain
had penetrated to the queen's apartments; and little Arthur, her gentle
and darling son, was desirous to see the countrymen of Columbus, whose
promised discoveries were the parent of such wonder and delight
throughout the world. The prince of Wales must not be denied this
pleasure, and the Spaniard was ushered into the queen's presence. An
enthusiast in his art, his energetic, though simple expressions
enchanted the intelligent prince, and even compelled the attention of
his little sturdy brother Henry. He spoke in words, borrowed from
Columbus's own lips, of translucent seas, of an atmosphere more softly
serene than ours, of shores of supernal beauty, of the happy natives, of
stores of treasure, and the bright hopes entertained concerning the
further quest to be made in these regions. Elizabeth forgot herself to
listen, and regretted the necessity of so soon dismissing him. She asked
a few questions relative to himself, his vessel; "She was a gallant
thing once," replied her commander, "when I took her from the Algerines,
and new-christened her the Adalid; because, like her owner, being of
Moorish origin she embraced the true faith. My own name, please your
grace, is Hernan de Faro, otherwise called the Captain of the Wreck, in
memory of a sad tedious adventure, many years old."

"De Faro--had he not a daughter?"

Anxiety and joy showed itself at once in the mariner's countenance.
Monina!--Where was she? How eagerly and vainly had he sought
her--faltering, the queen had only power to say, that Sir William
Stanley, the lord chamberlain, could inform him, and, terrified, put an
end to the interview.

Two days after--already had De Faro found and fondly embraced his
beloved child--Urswick, at the king's command, sent for the hero of the
stilyard, and, after some questioning, disclosed his commission to him;
it was such, that, had de Faro been in ignorance, would have led him to
suspect nothing--he was simply to sail for Ostend; where he would seek
Sir Robert Clifford, and deliver a letter: he was further told that he
was to remain at Sir Robert's command, to receive on board his vessel
whoever the knight should cause to embark in her, and to bring them
safely to England. To all this De Faro, aware of the dread nature of
these orders, assented; and, in Stanley's summer-house, with the lord
chamberlain, Monina, and Frion, it was discussed how this web of treason
could best be destroyed. There was little room for doubt; Monina
resolved to sail with her father, to denounce Clifford to the prince,
and so save him and his friends from the frightful snare. Frion still
remained in England, to try to fathom the whole extent of the mischief
intended; though now, fearful of discovery, he quitted his present
abode, and sought a new disguise. Stanley trembled at Clifford's name,
but he saw no suspicion in his sovereign's eye, and was reassured.

The Adalid sailed, bearing the king's letters to Clifford, and having
Monina on board, who was to unfold to the deceived prince and his
followers the dangers that menaced them.

Already, as the appointed time drew near, most of Richard's partizans
were assembled at Ostend; a fleet of three vessels was anchored in the
port to convey them to England to fated death; the prince himself, with
Clifford, sojourned in a castle at no great distance. Sir Robert
insinuated himself each day more and more into his royal friend's
confidence; each day his hatred grew, and he fed himself with it to keep
true to his base purpose; among the partizans of York sometimes he felt
remorse; beside the bright contrast of his own dark self, never.

Monina landed; and, the prince being absent, first she sought Lady
Brampton--she was at Brussels; then Plantagenet,--he was expected, but
not arrived from Paris; then she asked for Sir George Neville, as the
chief of the English exiles; to him she communicated her strange, her
horrid tidings, to him she showed Henry's still sealed letter to
Clifford. What visible Providence was here, laying its finger on the
headlong machinery that was bearing them to destruction! Neville was all
aghast: he, who did not like, had ceased to suspect Clifford, seeing
that he adhered to them at their worst. He lost no time in bringing
Monina to the castle, but ten miles distant, where York then was; he
introduced her privately, and, wishing that she should tell her tale
herself, went about to contrive that, without Clifford's knowledge or
suspicion, the prince should have an interview with her.

Monina did not wonder that her bosom throbbed wildly, as she remained in
expectation of seeing her childhood's playfellow, from whom she had been
so long absent. Nor did she check her emotion of intense pleasure when
she saw him, and heard him in her native Spanish utter expressions of
glad delight at so unexpectedly beholding her. Time had changed him very
little; his aspect was still boyish; and, if more thought was seated in
his eye, his smile was not the less frank and sweet; she was more
altered; her but little feminine form had acquired grace; the girl was
verging into the woman--blooming as the one, tender and impassioned as
the other; her full dark eyes, which none could behold and not feel the
very inner depths of their nature stirred, were the home of sensibility
and love. A few moments were given to an interchange of affectionate
greeting, and then York, recurring to the mysterious mode in which
Neville had expressed himself, asked if anything save a kind wish to
visit the brother of her childhood had brought her hither; she replied,
by relating to him the circumstances of her father's commission from
Henry, and delivering to him the letter for Sir Robert. The whole wide
world of misery contains no pang so great as the discovery of treachery
where we pictured truth; death is less in the comparison, for both
destroy the future, and one, with Gorgon countenance, transforms the
past. The world appeared to slide from beneath the prince, as he became
aware that Clifford's smiles were false; his seeming honesty, his
discourse of honour, the sympathy apparent between them, a lie, a
painted lie, alluring him by fair colours to embrace foulest deformity.
The exceeding openness and confidence of his own nature, rendered the
blow doubly unnatural and frightful; and Monina, who had half disliked,
and latterly had almost forgotten Clifford, was full of surprise and
pain to mark the affliction her friend's countenance expressed.

There was no time for regret. Neville interrupted them, and it became
necessary to act. Richard held in his hand the sealed proof of his
associate's falsehood; Sir George urged him to open it, so as to
discover the whole extent of the treason. The prince's eyes were at once
lighted up by the suggestion: no, no, because Clifford had been base, he
would violate no law of honour--there was no need for the sake of
others; his treachery discovered, was fangless; nor would he even
undertake the dark office of openly convicting and punishing: his
conscience and remorse should be judge and executioner.

Monina and Neville returned to Ostend. The prince sent a message to
Clifford with some trifling commission to execute in the same town; and
Sir Robert, who had heard of the arrival of a stranger caravel from
England, was glad of an opportunity, to ride over to learn its
character. His feet were in the stirrups, when a page brought him a
letter from the duke, which he was bid not to open till he had departed.
A sense of a mysterious meaning came over him. Was he discovered? At the
first dawn of this suspicion he clapped spurs to his horse, and was
already far away; then, impatient of uncertainty, as soon as half the
brief space to Ostend was measured, he took out the packet, eyed it
curiously, and, after many qualms and revolutions of feeling, suddenly
tore it open. King Henry's despatch, written in Urswick's well-known
hand, first met his eye. Worse in action than in thought, a cold dew
mantled on his brow; and, while his heart stood still in his labouring
breast, he cast his eyes over a few lines, written in Richard's fair
clear Spanish hand:--


  "This paper, joined to the mode in which it fell into my hands, accuses
  you of treason. If wrongfully, accord permission that the seal may be
  broken, and your innocence proved.

  "Even it the mystery which this letter contains cannot be divulged nor
  exculpated, all is not lost. Perhaps you are rather weak than guilty;
  erring, but not wicked. If so, return immediately on your steps; by a
  frank confession merit my confidence. I were unworthy of the mediation
  of the Blessed Saints, whom each night I solicit to intercede for me
  before our Heavenly Father, were I not ready to pardon one who has
  sinned, but who repents.

  "If your crime be of a deeper dye, and you are allied in soul to my
  enemy, depart. It is enough for me that I never see you more. If I
  remain a fugitive for ever, you will lose nothing by deserting my ruined
  fortunes; if I win the day, my first exercise of the dearest prerogative
  of kings, will be to pardon you.

                                                       "RICHARD."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE TRAITOR UNMASKED


                Shall I be the slave
     Of--what? a word? which those of this false world
     Employ against each other, not themselves,
     As men wear daggers not for self offence.
     But if I am mistaken, where shall I
     Find the disguise to hide me from myself?
     As now I skulk from every other eye.

                                              SHELLEY.


One of the surest results of guilt is to deprive the criminal of belief
in the goodness of others. Clifford was discovered. Even, if Richard
continued true to his promise of pardon, his adherents and counsellors
might force him to another line of conduct. A dungeon and death floated
terribly before his confused vision. Flight, instant flight to England,
where, by a full confession of many things he had reserved, and the
disclosure of an important unsuspected name, he might still receive
welcome and reward from Henry, was the only course left him to pursue.

His thoughts were chaos. Shame and indignation raged in his heart. He
was a convicted traitor, a dishonoured man. "Oh, my envied father!" in
his wretchedness he exclaimed, "you died gloriously for Lancaster. I
live, steeped in obloquy, for the same cause. Abhorred Plantagenet! what
misery has been mine since first your name came to drug me with racking
poison! What have I not endured while I cringed to the fair-haired boy!
Thank the powers of hell, that time is past! Devil as I have stamped
myself, his arch crime, lying, is no more my attribute. To the winds and
men's thirsty ears I may cry aloud--I hate Plantagenet!"

It was some relief to this miserable man to array his thoughts in their
darkest garb, soothing his evil passions with words, which acted on them
as a nurse's fondling talk to a querulous child. His line of conduct was
fixed: he remembered Neville's sudden appearance and departure the night
before; he had brought the letter; he was waiting for him at Ostend to
seize on him, to turn to mockery the prince's promised pardon. Those
were days of violence and sudden bloodshed: the enemy a man could not
visit with legal punishment, he thought himself justified in destroying
with his own hand; the passions of the Yorkists, who found they had been
driven into shambles instead of a fold, must be fierce and dangerous.
Without delay, he resolved to embark in one of the vessels then in the
roads; he hurried to the beach; the wind seemed fair; there was a poor
kind of hostelry, the common resort of sailors near, from whence a
signal could be given for a boat to be sent off for him. While waiting
for it, he quitted the noisy vulgarity of the inn, and walked towards a
kind of ruined tower, that once perhaps had served as a lighthouse. In
all the panic of guilt, a roof, however desolate, appeared a shelter,
and he sought it: it was dilapidated and dark; there were some rude,
narrow stairs leading to the upper story,--these he ascended, and
entered what had been a kind of guard-room, and started at the vision he
beheld: leaning against the aperture that had served for a casement,
looking on the wide green sea, was Monina. Her lustrous eyes turned on
him--eyes before whose full softness his violence, his insolence
quailed; till shame, despair, and rage, and the deep-seated arrogance of
his nature, conquered his better feelings. She knew his crime, witnessed
his disgrace; there was no more to lose in the world. What more could he
win? His presence occasioned her much emotion. She had just quitted
Neville, who somewhat angrily remarked upon the prince's ill-timed
lenity, and spoke bitterly of all the ill Clifford, thus let loose,
might do in England. And here he was, about to embark for that very
island, where one at least, Sir William Stanley, was at his mercy.
Gladly Monina seized on this opportunity to dive into his projects, and
to inspire by her energetic words the traitor's bosom with some sense of
right. She, alas! inspired passion only, and jealousy, that now at last
his rival would see her love-lighted eyes turned affectionately on him;
while all the reproach of which they were capable was his meed. What
such men as Clifford feel is not love: he had no real friendship for the
innocent girl; each feeling that expresses the sympathy of our
intellectual nature was never associated to him with the name of woman.
As she spoke therefore of his duties to God and man, violated, but not
irretrievably, and with soft persuasion entreated him to spare those
whose lives hung upon his word, he recovered his obduracy, and replied
in a tone whose hollow vaunting was at discord with the music that fell
from her lips--"My pretty maiden, I thank thee for thy good intentions,
and if thou wilt wholly undertake my instruction, will prove an apt
scholar. Honesty and I are too poor to be messmates; but if thou wilt
join us--by God, Monina, I mean what I say--the priest shall say grace
for us, and we will partake life's feast or fast together. I will sail
with thee to thy Spain, to the Indies of the West. England shall be a
forgotten name; the White or Red Rose, neither worse nor better in our
eyes than any blooms that smell as sweet: if thou refusest this, here
ends the last chance for honesty; and be the victim who it may, I care
not so my fortunes thrive."

"Unworthy man!" cried Monina; "farewell! I go to England also: I to
save, you to destroy. Bounteous Heaven will look on our several
intentions, and shape our course accordingly. Henry will visit with poor
thanks your blighted purpose, barren now of its ill fruit. Mine will be
the harvest; yours the unlamented loss."

She would have passed him, but he seized her slender wrist. "We will run
no race," he cried; "if we go to England, it will be together: listen to
the splash of oars, it is my boat among the breakers. We enter it
together; it is vain for you to resist; you are my prisoner."

Monina trembled in every joint: she felt that in very truth she was in
Clifford's power. There rode her father's caravel; but he could not
guess her pressing danger: he would behold her depart, ignorant of the
violence she was suffering, ignorant that she was there. No help!--no
form of words was there, that might persuade the ill-minded knight to
free her: her proud spirit disdained to bend; her cheek was flushed; she
strove to withdraw her hand. "Pardon me," said Clifford; "if my fingers
press too roughly; the slight pain you endure will hardly counterbalance
the fierce torture your words inflicted. Be patient, my fellows are
already here. Let us not act a silly mime before them; do not oblige me
to demonstrate too unkindly, that you are wholly in my power."

Hardly had he spoken the words when with a scream she sprang from him.
He turned; but before even he could see the gigantic form of De Faro, a
blow was struck which made him reel against the wall. It would have been
instantly followed by another, but that Monina had flung herself on her
father's breast, and he, supporting her, forgot his enemy, who recovered
himself, and drew his sword. He met the fierce glare of the injured
parent's eye, and shook. "We meet again, recreant!" were the only words
spoken by De Faro; and, as an elephant might snatch a youngling antelope
from the pursuit of a tiger, he took his daughter in his arms, descended
the steps with her, and, as Clifford stood gazing on the sea, in such
bitter mood as is the fruit of baffled malice, he saw the mariner lift
his daughter into the boat. It pushed from the shore; and, with long,
measured strokes, it swept the waves towards the caravel, whose sails
were again unfurled, while everything bespoke the readiness and anxiety
of the crew to depart.

Ere the Adalid had reached the open sea, Clifford in his vessel was but
little astern. It was a race they ran. The caravel at first had the
best. Night concealed them from each other's view; and, in the morning,
already on the tranquil bosom of the Thames Sir Robert's vessel was
sailing alone towards London. By one of those strange turns of fortune
by which our purposes swim or are wrecked, De Faro, without a pilot,
unacquainted with the coast, missed the channel; he grounded on a
sand-bank at the river's mouth; and the tide which carried Clifford so
swiftly towards London had several hours to run before it reached a
height sufficient to float the other's vessel; the situation was not
without peril, and no boat even could be lowered to carry the anxious
Monina to shore.

The very day (it was now the month of January) that Henry heard of
Clifford's arrival in London, he removed his court from Westminster to
the Tower. Already he divined that his Lord Chamberlain was to be
criminated by Sir Robert; and, as Stanley possessed considerable
influence in the state, he wished to make his arrest as unexpected as
possible. Another motive worked upon the avaricious sovereign; seized
thus, without preparation or forethought, his jewels, his rich plate,
his valuable moveables, which might otherwise be secreted, now fell the
indiscriminate prey of confiscation; the Tower, at once a palace and a
prison, favoured this purpose. Here he received Clifford; Urswick had
already conversed with the traitor knight, and represented to him the
necessity of ample confession. There was something in the priest's
manner that, like iron, entered Clifford's soul; he felt himself, too
truly, to be the abject slave, the despised tool of power; there was but
little need to use cajoleries or bribes with him now; he was there, to
be executed as a felon or pardoned as a spy, according as his
disclosures satisfied or not the callous-hearted king.

For his greater punishment, there clung to this unfortunate man a sense
of what he ought to and might have been, and a burning consciousness of
what he was. Hitherto he had fancied that he loved honour, and had been
withheld, as by a hair, from overstepping the demarcation between the
merely reprehensible and the disgraceful. The good had blamed him; the
reckless wondered at his proficiency in their own bad lessons; but
hitherto he had lifted his head haughtily among them, and challenged any
man to accuse him of worse than greater daring in a career all travelled
at a slower and more timid pace.

But that time was gone by. He was now tainted by leprous treachery; his
hands were stained by the blood of his deceived confederates; honour
disowned him for her son; men looked askance on him as belonging to a
pariah race. He felt this; and even Monina, who had last conversed with
him in the summer-house of the inn at Ostend, would hardly have
recognized him. He was then a bold-faced villain; his step was haughty;
his manner insolent. Now his gait was shuffling, his appearance mean,
his speech hesitating and confused. Urswick had known him a gay ruffler;
he started back: was this Sir Robert Clifford? He was obliged to use
with him the usual style of speech adopted towards men in his situation;
to speak of his duty towards his liege; the propriety of delivering up
the guilty to condign punishment: hackneyed phrases, which sounded cold
to the unhappy man.

There was no resource. At Henry's feet, kneeling before a king who used
him as a tool, but who hated him as the abettor of his rival, and
despised him as the betrayer of his friend, Clifford spoke the fatal
word which doomed the confiding Stanley to instant death, himself to the
horrors of conscious guilt, or, what as yet was more bitter to the
worldling, relentless outlawry from the society and speech of all,
however depraved, who yet termed themselves men of honour.

Henry heard him with feigned amazement; and with grating words of
insulting unbelief, demanded evidence of his chamberlain's treason:
these were easily furnished, yet such as they were, they comprised such
irrefragable proof of the identity of the outcast duke, that Henry
found, that while they confirmed him more than ever in his resolve that
Stanley should suffer the severest penalty of his crime, it made it
difficult to bring forward the testimonials of his guilt. This was for
after consideration: Clifford was dismissed with cold thanks, with
promise of pardon and reward, and a haughty command neither to obtrude
himself again into the royal presence, nor to depart from London without
especial leave.

Henry's first act was to command Stanley not to quit his chamber in the
Tower. The next day before the hour of noon, the Bishop of Durham, Lord
Oxford, Lord Surrey, Urswick, and Lord Dawbeny, met in the fallen
chamberlain's apartment, for the purpose of examining him. A thousand
opposing feelings operated upon Stanley: accustomed to pay deference to
the king, even now he said nothing to displease him; and his expressions
rather spoke of compassion for him who very possibly was duke of York,
than any falling off from his allegiance to the then king of England.

This monarch was tormented by no doubts,--to be actuated by no pity.
Stanley's acknowledgment of the truth of the Burgundian pretender roused
his bitterest feelings. In addition, he was rich booty--which weighed
heavily against him; so that, when Bishop Fox remarked on the villany
and extent of his treason, Henry, off his guard, exclaimed--"I am glad
of it; the worse the better: none can speak of mercy now, and
confiscation is assured;"--nor did he in the interval before his trial,
nor after it, express one regret that the man was about to forfeit his
head, who had encircled his own with the regal diadem.

Tried, condemned; but a few days remained before on the fatal block the
rich, noble, prudent, royally-connected Sir William Stanley would
expiate his guilt to Henry. All wondered; many pitied; few thought of
soliciting for or aiding the fallen man; yet one or two there were, whom
this last blow against York filled with bitter regret. In a secluded
part of London Lord Barry, who had just arrived, Frion, and Monina met.
Barry came with intelligence that there had appeared in Ireland a
gentleman from Scotland, commissioned by its young monarch to inquire
into the truth of Richard's story; and, if indubitably he were the man
he pretended, to counsel him to visit Scotland, where he would find
friendship and aid. The Earl of Desmond also had just arrived in London,
and Lord Barry was in his company. This downfall of Stanley called their
minds from every other consideration. Monina was peculiarly agitated and
thoughtful. One evening she joined them late: she was full of some
project. "I can, I do believe, save our friend," she said: "the
assistance I need is small--you, Master Stephen, will hasten on board
the Adalid, and bid my father have all in readiness, for sailing, and to
drop down the river as far as Greenwich: you, my dear lord, must also
take a part in my scheme--keep watch on the river, right opposite the
Tower, during the coming night and the following: if you see a light
upon the shore beneath its dark walls, come towards it with a boat; the
blessed Virgin aiding my design, it shall be freighted with
disappointment to the Tudor, joy to us."

Lord Barry and Frion promised obedience, though they would have
dissuaded her from the risk; but she was devoted, enthusiastic, firm:
she left them, nor did they delay to execute her commission, and both
went down the river to De Faro's caravel. Here a new surprise awaited
them. The duke of York and his friends had not been idle in the interim.
Each design, as it failed, gave place to another. They were diminished
in numbers, but now no traitors were among them. Their hopes were few;
but, unless the present time were seized, there would be none. The false
expectations Clifford had held out to them of coalition and succour in
England were lost, but attachment to York was alive in many an English
bosom: the preparations of arms they had made still existed; it was
resolved therefore in early spring to descend on the English shores.

The duke of York, deeply grieved by the ruin that visited his friends,
stung to the heart by Clifford's treachery, resolved meanwhile to seek
relief in action. Could not his presence do much? Unknown in England, he
might visit the Yorkists, rouse their affection, and form such a union,
as, assisted afterwards by his friends and their little fleet, would
contribute to insure success. His friends did not approve of the hazard
to which he exposed himself; but everything they alleged on this score,
only confirmed his purpose. "All endanger themselves--all die for me,"
he cried; "shall I alone be ingloriously safe?" The first sight
therefore that presented itself to Lord Barry and Frion on the deck of
the Adalid, was Prince Richard and Edmund Plantagenet.

The duke's presence did not change the purpose of Frion's visit. De Faro
got his vessel in readiness for the voyage; and Lord Barry, as evening
closed in, prepared to take his stand--not singly: Richard insisted on
sharing his watch; docile as he usually was, remonstrance had now no
effect; hitherto he had given himself up to guarded safety, now he
seemed in love with peril, resolved to court her at every opportunity.
The risk to which Monina exposed herself, made him obstinate. He would
have thought himself untrue to the laws of chivalry, a recreant knight,
had he not hastened to protect her; and, more than this--for the inborn
impulses of the heart are more peremptory than men's most sacred
laws--he loved; and a mother draws not more instinctively her
first-born to her bosom, than does the true and passionate lover feel
impelled to hazard even life for the sake of her he loves, to shield her
from every danger, or to share them gladly with her.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE TOWER


     I do not like the Tower of any place.

                                        SHAKSPEARE.


At nine o'clock in the evening, York and Lord Barry took their station
on the Thames, at the appointed place. The boat was tethered to the
shore; and the rising tide brought them nearer to the banks. All was
dark during the cold night of early February; to the right and left,
nothing was apparent save the glimmering water, and the only sound was
the rushing and rippling of the Thames, as it sped downward in its
course.

"My mother greets me with a cold kiss," said the prince; "in truth she
has wedded mine enemy, and cast me out from my inheritance."

A brief pause ensued--a few minutes, which were freighted with the
cares and sorrows of years. Back, back, young Richard threw his eye over
the skeleton shapes of the dead years; and again he sought to penetrate
the future. Dark as the starless sky, not one gleam of comfort presented
itself to the outcast's hope. But such state of mind was unnatural to
the ardent boy, and he sprang from it;


     "Like to a lark at break of day, uprising
      From sullen earth, to sing at heaven's gate,"


he soared from grovelling despondency into recollections of the labour
and love that had been expended on him. His harvest might never be the
crown at which he aimed; but, better still, the ambrosial food of
affection and devoted attachment, that filled him even to sweet satiety.

"A light! our beacon!" cried Lord Barry.

A small gleam appeared on the opposite bank. It moved; then returned to
its former place, and was stationary. They watched it, till they became
satisfied that it was the guide for which they were waiting. The early
matin service rung from several convents, and came pealing faintly
across the water. It was the dead of night, and the gentlemen gladly
exchanged their inert watch for the labour of contending with the tide
and floating ice, which impeded their way as they rowed across the
Thames to where the light was now fixed.

The drear bank of the Tower-moat rose abruptly from the water-side, and
the waves lay murky dark beneath the arch of the Traitor's Gate. The
tide, which was setting in, carried them above the point were the light
was, to this spot. Their beacon indeed had disappeared; and, as they
waited its return, they floated idly on the river, merely giving now and
then a few strokes, to keep the wherry stationary. They did not perceive
that, while they thus curbed the tide, they had drifted into an eddy
which carried them fast down, till jamming them between the wall of the
Tower and a near pile, their boat lurched, partly filled with water, and
resisted every attempt they made to extricate it. The clouds were
getting thinner before the pale waning moon; but their fancied
beacon-light had vanished.

Their situation was sufficiently dreary. The cold was piercing. They had
difficulty in keeping themselves out of the water that lay at the bottom
of the boat. Lord Barry was a soldier, accustomed to hair-breadth
escapes and dangerous attempts; Richard a bold youth, who thought that
his best safety depended on his own exertions. They were neither of them
inclined to linger tamely in their present situation.

"Before our limbs get numbed with this biting breeze, we must use them
to our own benefit. Your highness can swim?"

"So say the streams of the Vega," replied Richard: "but the very
remembrance of those sweet brooks makes me shudder at the chilly bath
this ice-nourished river affords. I will reconnoitre the land before I
attempt the freezing wave." With lithe, sinuous limbs he coiled about
the pile, and continued to raise himself to where a beam rested on the
upright post, and again was fixed in the turret, which spans and guards
the entrance to the Tower by water. He had hardly gained this place, and
he felt little cold as with nervous fingers he kept fast in the position
he had attained, when a ray of light fell upon the water, streaming from
out a window of the turret. It was but for a moment, and it disappeared;
but Richard's eyes had glanced keenly on the illuminated spot. The
transverse beam he had attained was but little below the window; it had
been grated, but two of the stancheons were broken. This, to our
adventurer, suspended between the unattainable sky and the icy wave,
seemed a place of refuge. Carefully and slowly, he with clinging knees
and hands contrived to get along the beam, to raise himself on his feet
on it, and then to clutch the broken iron bar, and hoist himself into a
chamber of the Tower of London.

The immediate physical dangers that beset our adventurers were so great
(the least horrific of which was spending the night exposed to freezing
blasts, which Barry already felt chilling his very heart's blood), that
they both forgot the dangerous nature of the asylum they were seeking.
The Irish noble had, as well as darkness permitted, followed the
movements of his young companion; the same ray which guided Richard to
temporary safety, had showed to Barry the mode of following him. He made
the attempt; but, though stronger, he was not so agile as his friend;
besides, the minutes which had elapsed during Richard's exertions, had
enfeebled by numbing the other's powers; he got nearly to the top of the
pile--he felt his fingers slip, and that he could hold on no longer.
One desperate struggle he made to cling closer; his grasp seemed rather
to relax, than tighten, in the attempt; and Richard, after a second,
heard with horror his heavy fall into the water. But Barry was more at
his ease in the yielding wave; and the very intensity of the cold,
burning his skin, set his blood in motion; the tide also had arrived at
its height during this interval, and had turned: without great
difficulty the noble cleared, after a few strokes, the abrupt banks that
fence the Tower, and landed on a quay below.

Richard heard the waters splash from under his strokes. The silence was
so entire, that he thought he could distinguish the change of sound when
the swimmer emerged, and plainly heard Lord Barry's shout, in his own
native Irish, of thanksgiving and good cheer. For a moment, like
lightning, it flashed into his mind, the thought of the ominous refuge
he had found; and he was tempted to leap into the water, and to rejoin
his friend. But by this time the alarm of some one having plunged into
the river had been spread by the sentinels. The court became thronged;
some hastened to the wall, others loosened the boats tethered beneath
the gate, and issued in them from under the dark arch, over which Duke
Richard had found refuge. By the glare of many torches, they discovered
the wherry wedged in, as has been described. The splash attested that
some one had fallen into the water: that some one should escape from the
fortress, was more readily present to their imaginations than that any
should enter. They called to each other, communicating their surmises
and intentions: then one boat remained in guard close at the gate, while
the other rowed down the stream. Their exertions must end in nothing,
for Lord Barry had had full time to insure his escape.

Richard attended to all their motions: several of the men in pursuit had
issued from the lower chambers of the turret in which he was: it was not
thus cooped up that he chose to be found; all seemed still; the only
sounds came from the men in the boat; he descended the stairs; he came
out upon the court of the Tower; the dark fortress frowned above,
casting, in spite of the dull moon, a shadow dark enough to hide him.
Steps were heard approaching; he turned under a dim archway; he ascended
a narrow, steep staircase; the steps still followed; hurriedly he opened
a door, and entered a chamber; the men, whoever they might be, were
unaware of his presence; they passed the door, turned down another
gallery; the very echo of their steps died away.

Did he recognize the spot where he then stood? Well!--far too
well!--with a sickening feeling, an irresistible impulse to penetrate
into the very heart of the horror that made his pulses faint, he gazed
on the walls around. Was he then alone changed? Had he sprung up into
manhood, thought, experienced, suffered; and had the material universe
stood still the while? He saw before him a small chamber, enlightened by
one deep-set window, half blocked up by projecting buttresses outside:
there was the pallet-bed, the prie-Dieu, the little crucifix; his infant
limbs had reposed there; on that couch his brother had died.

This was the Tower! Ten years before he had escaped from its gloomy
walls; and had he done this only to return again, when maturer years
gave him a bitterer feeling of the ills he must endure? He had visited
England, guided by the traitor-spirit of Clifford, it seemed; for he had
returned but to render himself a prisoner; yet at first these thoughts
were hardly so painful as the memory of his childhood. The superstitious
fears of the Tower, which haunted poor Edward, had made it an abode of
terror for both: how often had they lain in that bed, curdling each
other's young blood with frightful tales! His brother had pined, and
died. Now, true to the pious usages of the times, he knelt to say a
paternoster for his soul; he said another for his own perilous state;
and then, having, with entire faith committed himself to the protection
of his Father in Heaven, he rose with a cheered heart and sustained
courage.

What was he to do? He was in the Tower; a fortress so well guarded, that
of the unhappy beings confined there for life, none had ever made their
escape; high walls, numerous courts, and grated windows, opposed his
egress. The clock chimed one. It were as well to remain where he was, as
to go on. But it were better still to turn back; quiet would soon be
restored; he might attain the same room, the same window, and leap
thence into the waters below. He remembered wherefore he had come; the
hazardous enterprise of Monina, and the imprisonment of Stanley. Now
that he had attained this chamber, the whole Tower presented itself, as
in a map, to his memory: he knew where the rooms allotted to state
prisoners were situated: confident in his knowledge, his feelings
underwent an entire change; instead of considering himself a prisoner in
the Tower, he felt lord of its labyrinths. Darkness was his wand of
office; the ignorance of all that he was there, was his guard; and his
knowledge of the place, better than the jailor's key, might aid him to
liberate the victims of his enemy.

In this temper of mind he rejoiced that he had been unable to follow his
first impulse in leaping from the window; and he resolved on making his
way immediately to the part of the fortress inhabited by the state
prisoners. Blindfold, setting out from the point where he was, he could
have found his way; yet several images of barred and locked doors
presented themselves to his recollection, as intervening between the
spot where he then was, and that which he desired to visit. He descended
again into the court--he skirted the edifice, keeping close to the
shadowy wall--he saw the door but a few paces distant, which led to the
prison-chambers. At dead of night it must be locked and barred, guarded
by a sentinel, quite inaccessible to him. He paused--he saw no soldier
near--he walked on a few steps quickly; the door was wide open--this
looked like success--he sprang up the steps; a man below cried, "Who
goes there?" adding, "Is it you, sir? My light is puffed out; I will
bring one anon." Above he heard another voice--there was no
retreat--he went on, relying on some chance that might afford him a
refuge under cover of murky night from the twofold danger that beset
him. A man stood at the doorway of the nearest chamber: it was not
possible to pass him--as he hesitated he heard the words, "Good rest
visit your lordship--I grieve to have disturbed you." Richard retired a
few steps--the man closed, locked the door--"A light, ho!" he
exclaimed, and the prince feared to see the servitor ascend the stairs.
The moon, just beginning to show its clouded rays, threw a brief ray
upon the landing where Richard stood, and he moved out of the partial
radiance; the slight movement he made attracted notice, which was
announced by a challenge of "Who goes there? is it you, Fitzwilliam? How
is this? the word, sir!"

The duke knew that, among the numerous and various inhabitants of the
Tower, many were personally unknown to each other; and that any stranger
visitor was not intrusted with the word--so he replied immediately, as
his best safeguard: "I was roused by the calling of the guard. I knew
not that such, reveilles were usual; good night, sir."

Those pay little attention to the impression of their senses, who are
not aware that family resemblance develops itself in nothing so much as
the voice; and that it is difficult in the dark to distinguish
relatives. In confirmation of this I heard a sagacious observer remark,
and have proved the observation true, that the formation of the jaw, and
setting of the teeth is peculiar, and the same in families. But this is
foreign--enough that, caught by the voice, hardly able to distinguish
the obscure outline of the speaker in the almost blackness of
night--the man replied, "I crave pardon, my good lord, you forget
yourself; this way is your chamber. What, ho! a light!"

"It needs not," said the prince; "the glare would offend mine eyes--I
shall find the door."

"Permit me," said the other, going forward, "I will wait on your
lordship so far. I wonder not you were roused; there was an alarm at the
river postern, and the whole guard roused. Sir John thought it might
concern poor Sir William; and I was fain to see all right with him. It
irked me truly to break in on his repose; the last he may ever have."

They approached a door; the man's hand was on the lock--Richard's heart
beat so loud and fast, that it seemed to him that alone must be
perceived and excite suspicion--if the door were fastened on the inside
he were lost; but the man was in no hurry to try--he talked on:--

"The lieutenant was the more suspicious, because he gave credit and easy
entrance to his pretended stripling son, who craved for it even with
tears: yet when they met, we all thought that the Lord Chamberlain did
not greet him as a parent would a child at such a time; the truth,
indeed, we saw with half an eye, be she his daughter, or his light of
love; yet not the last, methinks, for she seemed right glad to be
accommodated for the night in a separate chamber--she is a mere girl
beside, and in spite of her unmeet garb, modest withal."

"When goes she? With the dawn?" Richard hazarded these questions, for
his silence might be more suspected than his speech; and the information
he sought, imported to him.

"Nay, she will stay to the end for me," said the man: "Sir William was a
kind gentleman, as I can testify, in his prosperity; and it is little to
let him have the comfort of this poor child's company for a day longer:
he dies on the morrow."

"Could I see this fair one?"

"By my troth, fair she is not, though lovely to look on, but somewhat
burnt, as if her mother had been a dweller in the south. If you visit
and take leave of Sir Stanley to-morrow, you may chance to behold her:
but I detain you, my Lord; a good night, rather, a good morning to your
lordship."

He unclosed the door; all was dark within, save that the chamber opened
into another at the further end, in which evidently a lamp was burning.
Kind thanks and a benison passed; Richard stepped within the apartment,
and the door shut on him.

What could this mean? Glad, confused, yet still fearful, the prince was
almost deprived of the power of motion. Recovering himself with a strong
effort, he passed on to the inner chamber: it was a bedroom, tapestried,
strewed thick with rushes, a silver lamp suspended by a silver chain to
the grim claws of a gilt eagle, which was fixed in the ceiling, gave
token of rank, as well as the rich damask of the bed-furniture and the
curious carving of the couch and seats; the articles of dress also
strewed about belonged to the noble-born: strange, as yet Richard had
not conjectured for whom he had been mistaken! He drew near the bed, and
gazed fixedly on its occupier. The short, clustering, auburn curls were
tinged with grey, yet the sleeper was young, though made untimely old by
suffering; his cheeks were wasted and fallen in; the blue veins on his
brow were conspicuous, lifting the clear skin which clung almost to the
bones; he was as pale as marble, and the heavy eyelids were partly
raised even in sleep by the large blue ball that showed itself beneath;
one hand lay on the coverlid, thin to emaciation. What manner of victim
was this to Henry's tyranny? nay, the enigma was easily solved: it must
be the earl of Warwick. "And such, but for my cousin Lincoln, would have
been my fate," thought Richard. He remembered his childhood's
imprisonment; he thought of the long days and nights of confinement, the
utter hopelessness, the freezing despair, blighting the budding hopes of
youth, the throes of intolerable, struggling agony, which had reduced
poor Warwick to this shadow of humanity; he felt a choking sensation in
his throat as he bent over him; large drops gathered in his eyes; they
fell, ere he was aware, on the sleeper's wan check.

Warwick turned uneasily, opened his eyes, and half-started up: "Whom
have we here?" he cried: "why am I disturbed?"

"Your pardon, fair gentleman," Richard began----

"My pardon!" repeated Warwick, bitterly; "were that needed, you were not
here. What means this intrusion--tell me, and be gone?"

"I am not what you take me for, cousin Edward," said the prince.

Now, indeed, did Warwick start; shading his eyes from the lamp, he gazed
earnestly on the speaker, murmuring, "That voice, that name--it cannot
be! In the name of sweet charity speak again; tell me what this means,
and if you are--why this visit, why that garb?"

"My dear lord of Warwick," said the prince, "dismiss this inquietude,
and if you will listen with patience to the story of an unhappy kinsman,
you shall know all. I am Richard of York; those whose blood is akin to
yours as well as mine, have ycleped me the White Rose of England."

The earl of Warwick had heard of the Pretender set up by his aunt, the
duchess of Burgundy; he had often pondered over the likelihood of his
really being his cousin, and the alteration it would occasion in his
fortunes, if he were to succeed. Shut out from the world, as he had been
so long, the victim of mere despair, he could not even imagine that good
could betide to any one, save to the oppressor of his race; to see
Perkin, for so he had been taught to call him, within the walls of the
ill-fated Tower, appeared to disclose at once his defeat. Even when the
duke rapidly and briefly narrated the accidents that had brought him
thither, and his strange position. Prince Edward believed only that he
had been decoyed into the trap, which had closed on him for ever.

Still Richard talked on; his ardour, his confidence in his own measures,
his vivacious anxiety already to put them into practice, his utter
fearlessness, were not lost upon one who had been dead to outward
impressions, not from want of sensibility, but from the annihilation of
hope. Some of his cousin's spirit overflowed into Warwick's heart; and,
in conclusion, he assented to all he said, promising to do whatever was
required of him, though after ten years of lone imprisonment he almost
shrunk from emerging from his listless state.




CHAPTER XXV

THE RESCUE


     Let all the dukes and all the devils roar,
     He is at liberty! I've ventured for him;
     And out I've brought him to a little wood
     A mile hence.

                                       TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.


Morning, cold and wintry, dawned upon the gloomy chambers of the Tower.
York became eager to put in execution some plan of escape in which
Warwick should share; but Warwick was full of timidity and fear. His
prison was a frightful den; yet all without was a wide, pathless,
tiger-infested jungle. He besought his cousin to regard his own safety
only. Richard refused; yet the more he meditated, the more did obstacles
crowd upon him. After the lapse of an hour, Warwick was called upon to
attend early mass, as usual, in the chapel of the fortress. Here he saw
Stanley and the disguised shrinking Monina; and, the service ended,
attended them to the prison-chamber of the chamberlain, relating as he
went, in quick low whispers, the history of the preceding night. Both
his hearers grew pale: one feared for her friend, the other for himself;
though on that score all cause of dread was well nigh at an end. All
three entered Stanley's cell, and found there Prince Richard himself,
whose active mind had led him to watch his opportunity to pass hither
unseen from Warwick's apartment.

The young earl of March, arming for the battle of Northampton, looked
not so young, so blooming, and so frankly erect, as his uncrowned son.
Stanley saw at once who was before him, and, never forgetting the
courtier, addressed his prince with a subject's respect. York was struck
by the placid, though somewhat worldly physiognomy of the man, devoted
to die, at the age when human beings are most apt to cling to life;
when, having weathered the storms and passions of youth, they desire to
repose awhile on the sun-enlightened earth, before they enter the gloomy
gates of the tomb.

The prince spoke eagerly of escape--of safety--of life: Warwick, even
timid Warwick, urged an attempt at flight; while Monina kissed her aged
friend's hand, and turned her sweet eyes on him, saying: "You will
listen to him, though you were deaf to me."

Stanley alone was unmoved--"A thousand heartfelt, useless thanks, my
dear and honoured Lord, your poor servant renders; and even when prayer
for himself is most needed, earnestly he prays that harm to you arise
not from your unexampled generosity. I cannot fly; I do believe that I
would not, if I could: and I will spare myself the disgrace of further
endangering you, and of being seized myself in the coward's act. Ask me
not, with your beseeching eyes, my gentle, venturous child, for it must
not be. I die to-morrow; and this fate you would have me avoid. Whither
would you drag me from the block? To poverty? to an unhonoured old age?
a traitor's reputation, and miserable dependence? I am a sinful man; but
I trust in God's mercy, and he holds out better hopes after the brief
spasm of death, than you after the torture of difficult escape."

More he would have said; but they were interrupted. They had not been
aware of any one's approach; and suddenly Sir John Digby, lieutenant of
the Tower, entered. He was aghast to see one more than he expected--one
whose demeanour spoke nobility. Silence followed his entrance; nor did
words readily present themselves to the blunt soldier. At length,
addressing the cause of this wonder, he, in an ironical tone of voice,
asked, "May I, lieutenant of this fortress, delegated by his majesty to
its keeping, be permitted to ask, fair sir, the name, station, and
designs of my unbidden guest?"

"My answer to your two first questions," replied York, "would little
satisfy you. My design was to facilitate the escape of this virtuous and
unhappy gentleman."

"The king is infinitely your debtor; and I shall prove unmannered in
marring your intent."

"You do not mar it. Sir John," said the prince. "My Lord Chamberlain is
a true man, and would rather lay his head on the block, at his liege's
bidding, than carry it in security at the prayer of any other. Sir
William has refused to fly; and, my mission ended, I was about to take
my leave."

"Do so, young man; take leave--an eternal one--of Sir William, and
follow me. My lord of Warwick, this is an unmeet scene for you to be
present at. This holy man comes to bestow the last words of pious
comfort my noble prisoner can receive in this world: please your
lordship to leave them together uninterrupted. I am sorry," continued
the lieutenant, addressing Monina, "to retract the permission I gave you
yesterday; but this strange incident must be my excuse. Say a last
farewell to him you have named your father."

Monina dreaded too much the fate that might befall her friend to entreat
for any change in this decree. Soon poor Sir William found himself
separated from the busy scene of life, shut up with the chaplain. He was
bid to remember and repent, and to prepare to die. A dark veil fell
before the vista of coming years, which was apparent to the eyes of his
late companions. He saw in the present hour--one only, almost
superfluous, added to the closing account. They beheld in it the arbiter
of their undivined destinies.

It is an awful emotion when we feel that the "very shoal of time" on
which we stand is freighted with the good and ill of futurity--that the
instant birth of the hour inherits our entire fortunes. Yet Richard was
proof against this rough testimony of our powerless mortality. The ill
had not yet arrived with which he did not believe he could cope; and
more--now he was bent upon endeavouring to save Stanley; for his own
fate, though about to expose it to the most unquestioned shape of peril,
he had no fears.

Sir John Digby, followed by his new prisoners, paced back to his own
chamber, and then addressed his uninvited guest. "Fair gentleman," he
said, "again I crave to be informed of your name and degree, that his
majesty may be duly made acquainted on whom to bestow his thanks. Your
speech and appearance are English?"

"Whoever I may be," replied York, "I will reveal nothing except to your
king. If he is willing to listen to disclosures nearly touching his
throne and safety, I will rouse him by a tale to shake sleep from one
who has steeped his eyes in poppy-juice. To no other will I vouchsafe a
word."

Monina listened in terror. She would have given her life to beseech her
friend to retract that foolish word: but it was too late; while his
questioner, startled by his unforeseen reply, said, "You make a bold
demand. Think you that his grace is of such common use, that it is an
easy matter to attain his presence?"

"I have said it, Sir John," answered York. "Your liege may hereafter
visit with poor thanks the denial you give me."

The lieutenant fixed his eyes on him: his youth and dignity impressed
him favourably; but he hesitated, confused by doubts of who and what he
might be. At last he said, "His majesty is at present at his palace of
Shene, ten miles hence.

"The less reason, Sir Lieutenant," replied Richard, "that you should
dally in the execution of your duty. The life of your prisoner, the
fortunes of your king, depend upon this interview."

This was a riddle difficult for Sir John to solve; and he was about to
order his enigmatical visitant to the guard-room, while he should
consult upon the fitting conduct to pursue; when a beating at the gates,
the letting down of the drawbridge, and the clatter of hoofs announced
fresh arrivals at the fortress.

The attention of every one was suspended, till, the usher announcing the
excellent prince, the earl of Desmond, that noble, attended by
followers, almost with regal pomp, entered. He cast his penetrating
glance around, and then unbonneting to the duke, he said respectfully,
"Your highness will believe that as soon as I heard of the position into
which, pardon me, your generous rashness has betrayed you, I hastened
hither to vouch for you, and deliver you from it."

To such a speech, so unexpected, so portentous, what answer? Richard
felt inclined to laugh, as he heard himself spoken to, in terms which
seemed to say that the discovery of who he really was, would occasion
his release; but he quickly discerned a hidden meaning beneath this
incomprehensible language, and he contented himself with graciously
thanking the earl for his interference, while this noble turned to
address the wondering Sir John.

"Sir Lieutenant," said he, "I have a strange story to tell, fitter for
his majesty's ears than those of a subject; but his grace is absent, and
it were not well that this noble gentleman should be kept in durance
while messengers go to and fro. Rather dismiss your followers, and I
will confide a weighty secret to you, and bring such arguments as will
induce you to intrust the high-born youth to my care and escort."

Digby was not much of a statesman; he had a simple heart, and
considerable veneration for rank. He knew that the earl of Desmond had
been well received at court, and complied with his desire. The noble
then began a long explanation of parties and tumults in Scotland; of the
frightful death of James the Third; the accession of James the Fourth;
the discontent of several chief nobles, who wished to set up the younger
brother of the new king in opposition to him. "Your highness," continued
Desmond, addressing Richard, "will pardon me for thus introducing your
name--this, Sir Lieutenant, is the duke of Rosse, who has come, and not
vainly, to seek the assistance of our liege."

Sir John bowed low and looked puzzled, while Desmond continued to speak
of disguise and secrecy, of friendship for Stanley, and of the rash
design of Lord Barry of Buttevant and the young duke to liberate him,
chiefly under the idea that thus they should best serve King Henry, who
must in his heart be loth to have his zealous friend put to death
through the falsehood of faction. "And now, gentle sir," he continued,
"be guided by me; the king loves peace; he loves state privacy; the very
presence of the duke in this country is a mystery; you will do agreeable
service by hushing up this youthful frolic. Permit his highness to
accompany me; I will make fitting report to his majesty, who will be
grateful withal."

There was a kind of confused tallying in the story; for Richard's
mysterious words were at no discord with Desmond's explanations; and his
excessively youthful and perfectly noble appearance were further
corroboration. Digby liked not the responsibility of keeping him: he
spoke of sending for the bishop of Durham. Desmond exclaimed, "A soldier
have recourse to a priest--this England is a strange country! Do as you
will; only until the thumber of missals arrive, this is no place of
entertainment fur the prince. We will receive you and your clericus at
Walbrook; and I will entertain the royal gentleman till you come."

Digby still looked blank and uncertain. Richard, who had remained
silent, now spoke: "Farewell, good sir: in truth, I need your excuse for
my impertinent visit; but here it ends. When I travel to Scotland, I
will report the favour I met at your hands."

This sufficed. Sir John sullenly yielded: with a mixture of fear and
deference, he attended his visitors to the court; they crossed the
drawbridge; and ere the Tower-gates closed behind them, they heard the
lieutenant order out a guard and his own horse, that without loss of
time he might communicate with the bishop.

The duke and his preserver rode gently enough down Tower Hill: scarce
had they reached the foot, before the earl gave a sudden command to his
followers, who turned one way, as he, York, and Monina, who had left the
Tower at the same time, and was mounted on one of Desmond's attendant's
horses, went another. "_Au galoppe_, dear my lord!" cried the earl, "we
have but a short hour's grace--this way--still the river to our left."

They galloped along with loosened reins. Arriving at the Vale of
Holborn, they followed the upward course of the Fleet, so as to reach
the open country; and many a wild field they crossed, and briary lane
they threaded--the country was flat, marshy, wild; skirted in various
directions by brown wintry woods, rarely interspersed by hamlets. The
river was their only guide; they followed its course for several miles,
till they reached the shelter of Caen Wood. "Thank St. Patrick for this
cover!" cried the Irish chieftain; "may my cousin Barry find no let nor
hindrance--yon troubled stream will guide him well. We have done a
daring deed: for me, I have not ridden so far, since my father, God sain
him! died--I am well nigh _hors de combat_."

The prince assisted both his companions to dismount. Lord Desmond's tale
was soon told, of how Lord Barry had sought him and suggested this mode
of effecting York's escape. "With the help of your Moorish friend," said
the earl, "no ill wind betide me--I shall be in Munster before the
riddle be half told; that is, if ever we reach the vessel. By my faith!
I would rather be knee-deep in a bog in Thomond, than dry-shod where I
am!"

As day advanced, the situation of the fugitives became still more
disquieting. All was tranquil in the leafless wood; but, in spite of the
sun, it was very cold. Besides, they were in an unknown spot, without
guide; their sole hope being, that each passing minute would bring Lord
Barry to their assistance. Earl Maurice was thoroughly disabled; he
grumbled at first, and at last, wearied out, lay on the cold ground, and
fell into a slumber. Monina, serious, timid, and yet, in spite of
herself, happy in her friend's safety, and in her own being near him,
was silent; while Richard, to escape from his own thoughts, talked to
her. When, for a moment, his conversation languished, his eyes were
fondly fixed upon her downcast face, and a strife of sentiment, of
ardent, long-restrained love, and a tortuous, but severe resolve to
protect her, even from himself, battled in his heart; so that, in
all-engrossing love, every sense of danger was lost.

Desmond at last roused himself: "The shadows grow long; herbage there is
little for our horses, pasture for ourselves there is none--if we stay,
we starve; if we stir, we----"

He was interrupted; strange voices came upon the wind; then the cracking
of boughs, and the sound of steps. Through the vista of bare trees the
intruders at length appeared, in strange array. There was a band of
ill-attired, ruffian-looking men, followed by women and children; their
swart visages, their picturesque, but scant and ragged garb, their black
hair, and dark flashing eyes, were not English. Some were on foot, some
on asses, some in a cart drawn by two rough ill-assorted colts--their
very language was foreign. Richard and Monina recognized a horde of
Gitani, Bohemians, or Gipsies; while Desmond looked in wonder on
something almost wilder than the Irish kern.

The savage wanderers were surprised to perceive the previous guests the
barren woods had received--they paused and looked round in some fear;
for the noble appearance of the gentlemen made them imagine that they
must be accompanied by numerous attendants. York's quick wit suggested
to him in a moment of what good use such humble friends might be. He
addressed them; told them that they were travellers who had lost their
way, "And so we have encroached on your rightful domain; but, like
courteous hosts, I beseech you, gentlemen, welcome us to your green-wood
palace, and make happy as you will grateful guests of us."

Thus invited, the whole horde gathered round--the women, fancying all
three of an opposite sex, were forward with their prophetic art.

"My fortune," cries Desmond, "shall not be told before supper; it is an
ill one, by the rood! at this hour. I have fasted since yesternight."

Preparations were speedily made for a repast, while Richard, alive to
his situation, looked around for the most fitting object to address;
whose charity and aid he could hope to solicit with the greatest
success. One laughing-eyed girl glanced at him with peculiar favour; but
near her stood and scowled a tall handsome countryman of her own. York
turned to another, fairer, who sat retired apart; she looked more gentle
and even refined than the rest. He addressed her in courtly phrase, and
her reply, though ready, was modest. The acquaintance was a little in
progress, when one of the oldest among the sibyls, with white hair, and
a face of wrinkled parchment, hobbled up, muttering, "Ay, ay, the
fairest flower is aye the dearest to pluck; any of those gaudy weeds
might serve his turn; but no, my young master must needs handle the
daintiest bloom of the garden." Notwithstanding this interruption,
Richard still stood his ground, bandying pretty speeches with one not
the less pleased, because, strictly guarded by her duenna, she was
unaccustomed to the language of flattery.

"Hast never a word for me, fair sir," said the crone, at last; "no
comparison of star and gems for one, who in her day has flaunted with
silk-clad dames--whose lips have been pressed even by a king?"

His father's reputation for gallantry, thus alluded to, brought the
blood into York's cheeks; forgetful of what import his words bore, he
replied lastly, "Sleep King Edward's faults with him, mother; it is
neither wise nor well to speak irreverently of those gone to their
doom--may God assoilzie him!"

"What voice is that?" cried the old woman; "if I boast, Heaven forgive
me, of his grace's slight favour, your mother may take shame----"

"Your words are naught," cried York, interrupting her, "my mother's is a
sacred name--yet, tell me in very truth, and give me some sign that,
indeed, you knew my father."

The word passed his lips before he was aware, but being spoken, he felt
that it were best not to recede. Seizing the old woman's shrivelled
hand, he said, "Look--use thy art--read my palm: read rather my
features, and learn indeed who I am: I am in danger; you may betray, or
you may save me: choose which you will--I am the duke of York."

An exclamation checked, a look of boundless surprise changed into a
cautious glance around, attested the gipsy's wish to serve the venturous
youth. "Rash boy," she answered, in a low voice, "what idle, or what
mortal words are these! How art thou here? With what hope--what aid?"

"Frankly, none but what I derive from your bounty. I have escaped worse
peril, so do not fear but that God will protect me, and even turn to
profit my parent's sin, if his kiss purchase his son's life."

"Young sir," said the gipsy, with great seriousness, "the flower of love
is gay--its fruit too often bitter. So does she know on whose account I
wickedly and shamelessly did the foul fiend's bidding, and ruined a
sinless soul to gratify the pleasure-loving king. But thou hast paid the
penalty: thou and thine, who have been called by the ill-word, thrust
from thy place by thy crook-back uncle; and now art nearer a dungeon
than a throne through thy father's fault. I will serve and save thee;
tell me quickly, who are thy companions--whither thou wouldst go--that
I may judge the best to be done."

It is to be observed, that at the very beginning of this colloquy, the
young girl, whom York had first addressed, had stolen away. Now he
replied by mentioning the lameness of his elder friend, and his resolve
not to be divided from the other. He spoke of the Adalid, and of his
further wish to be awhile concealed in England. The old woman continued
silent, wrapped in thought. At length she raised her head--"It can be
done, and it shall," she said, half to herself. "Come now, they are
serving our homely fare. You, who are young, and ill-apt for penance,
must eat before you go."

The savoury steams of the well-filled and rustic _marmite_, gave force to
her words, and to Richard's appetite. The repast was plentiful and gay,
and even too long. Evening was far advanced, the fire grew light in the
dusk, and threw its fitful rays upon the strange and incongruous
feasters. Monina had cowered close to Richard; the cup went round;
scarcely did she put it to her lips; a rude companion of the crew made
some rough jest on her sobriety. Richard's face lighted up with anger:
his watchful old friend stepped forward, in her own jargon she made some
communication to her associates, which caused a universal pause, and
then a stir: it was evident some movement was intended. She meanwhile
drew the three fugitives aside:

"In a few minutes," she said, "we shall all be on our way hence; listen
how I would provide for your safeties." She then proposed that Desmond
should assume the disguise of one of the horde, and so be conveyed in
safety to the banks of the Thames, and on board the Adalid. She promised
herself to conduct the prince and his young friend to a secure refuge.
The earl, accustomed to find fidelity and rags near mates, readily
acceded to this proposal. In the solitary unknown spot to which, chance
had directed them, environed by every danger, no step was more perilous
than the remaining where they were. York and Monina were familiar with
the reports of the gipsy character--its savage honour and untractable
constancy. The season was such, though the day had been unusually sunny
and warm, as to make a night in the open air no agreeable anticipation;
and Richard had a thousand fears on his lovely friend's account. They
all readily acceded to the old woman's plan. Desmond was quickly
disguised, his visage stained deep brown, his whole person transformed;
he was placed in the caravan, and the horde was speedily in movement;
the sound of their departing steps died away. They had left a rude cart,
to which York's horse, a strong hack, was harnessed. The sibyl undertook
to guide it. Richard and Monina ascended the jumbling fabric. Soon they
were on their journey, none but their conductress knew in what
direction; but they submitted to her, and through copse and over field
they wound their darkling way.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE EARL OF SURREY


     So love did vanish with my state,
     Which now my soul repents too late;
     Then, maids and wives, in time amend,
     For love and beauty will have end.

                                   BALLAD OF JANE SHORE.


                    Oh, it grieves my soul
     That I must draw this metal from my side
     To be a widow maker!

                                   SHAKSPEARE.


Seated in the rude gipsy-cart, guided, protected, by the uncouth being
into whose hands he had so strangely fallen, Richard, for the first
time, felt the degradation and low fortune to which his aspirations, at
variance with his means, made him liable. With a strong effort he
dismissed these painful ideas, and fixed his contemplation on mightier
objects, which gilded his mean estate, or were rather the "gold
o'erdusted" by such extraneous poverty. To rise from this lowliness to a
throne were an emprise worthy his ambition. Was he not a few hours ago a
prisoner in the terror-striking tower? And now he was free--free in his
England; which, when the battle-day was come and past, would claim him
for her own. A few words from Monina interrupted the silence: she sat at
his feet, and they conversed in whispers in Spanish. Night had gathered
round them; Monina, in all the innocence of her pure heart was supremely
happy: to be near her friend in his disasters, united to him in his
peril, was a more rapturous destiny to her than the world's best pomp,
and he absent. No busy conscience, no untoward thought disturbed in her
soul the calm of perfect bliss. She grew weary at last; her head sank on
Richard's knee, and, overworn with watching, she fell into a deep sleep.
Richard heard her regular breathing; once or twice his fingers played
among her dishevelled ringlets, while his heart whispered to him what a
wondrous creation woman was--weak, frail, complaining when she suffers
for herself; heroic fortitude and untired self-devotion are hers, when
she sacrifices herself for him she loves.

The cart moved on, Richard saw not whither; they almost stuck in some
flat, low fields, and at last arrived at a solitary, miserable hut.
Monina awoke, when they stopped, and the gipsy told them that this
wretched dwelling was to be their asylum: the apartment they entered was
poor beyond meanness--a bed of straw piled in one corner, a rude bench,
formed the furniture; the walls were ragged and weather-stained, and the
outer crumbling rafters were visible through the broken ceiling: there
appeared to be neither food nor fire. The inhabitant of the hovel alone
was there,--a white-looking, emaciated female; yet with a look of such
sweetness and patience, that she seemed the very enshrinement of
Christian resignation, the type of sorrow and suffering, married to meek
obedience to the supreme will. She had roused herself from slumber at
the voice of the gipsy, and gathered her scant garments around
her--scant and poor they were; her coarse woollen dress was tied by a
girdle of rope round her slender waist; her head was wrapped in a
kerchief; her feet were bare.

"Jane," said the old woman, "you will not refuse the shelter of your
roof to these poor wanderers?"

Such an address seemed strange, for the rich attire of her guests
ill-accorded with her poverty-stricken home; but she turned with a
smile--she spoke--and then a throb of agony seemed to convulse her
frame--her head swam; Richard rushed forward to prevent her falling,
but she shrunk from him, and leaned on the old woman, who said with a
look of triumph, "I knew how it would be; it is vain to hide a bright
light behind a veil of gauze! Yes, Jane, this is his son; and you may
save him from danger and death."

Jane Shore, the once lovely mistress of King Edward, now the miserable
outcast of the world's scorn, heard these words, as if they had been
spoken to her in a dream. After the death of her royal lover, she had
obeyed the impulse that made her cling to the soft luxuries of life, and
yielded to solicitations which tended to guard her from the sharp
visitation of the world. She had become the mistress of the marquess of
Dorset; but sorrow and penury were destined to pursue her in their worst
shape--and wherefore? She had been good and humane; and in spite of her
error, even the sternest moralist might have pitied her. But she was all
woman,--fearful of repulse, dreading insult; more willing to lie down
and die, than, fallen and miserable, to solicit uncertain relief:
squalid poverty, famine, and lonely suffering, were hers; yet in all she
preserved an unalterable sweetness of disposition, which painted her wan
face with, its own soft colouring.

The old woman went forth to seek for food, and the two friends were left
for several hours alone with Jane. She gazed affectionately on the
youthful duke; she looked more timidly on Monina, whose sex could not be
said to be disguised by her page's dress: the fallen woman fears women,
their self-sufficient virtues and cold reprobation; yet the sensibility
of Monina's countenance, and the soft expression of her eyes, so
all-powerful in their sweetness, could not be mistaken; and her first
shrinking from censure was exchanged for even a more painful feeling.
They were a lovely pair, these lone guests of poverty; innocence sat on
the brow of each, yet love beamed in their aspect:--love! the two-edged
sword, the flower-strewn poison, the dread cause of every misery! More
than famine and sickness Jane feared love; for with it in her mind were
linked shame and guilt, and the world's unkindness, hard to bear to one,
whose heart was "open as day to melting charity;" and she feared that
she saw in this sweet girl a bright reflex of her early days. Oh, might
the blotted mirror ne'er pourtray a change like hers! "I am a living
lesson of the woes of love," thought poor Jane; "may this chance-visit
to my hut, which saves young Richard's life, insure her innocence!" Thus
impelled, she spoke: she spoke of the danger of their solitary
companionship; she adjured York to fly the delusive charm--for love's
own sake he ought to fly; for if he made her his victim, affection would
be married to hate--joy to woe--her he prized to a skeleton, more grim
than death. Richard strove to interrupt her, but she misunderstood his
meaning; while Monina, somewhat bewildered, fancied that she only
alluded to the dangers she incurred in his cause, and with her own
beaming look cried, "Oh, mother, is it not better to suffer for one so
noble, than to live in the cold security of prosperity?"

"No, no," said Jane, "Oh, does my miserable fate cry aloud, no! Edward,
his father, was bright as he. Libertine he was called--I know not if
truly; but sincere was the affection he bore to me. He never changed or
faltered in the faith he promised, when he led me from the dull abode of
connubial strife to the bright home of love. Riches and the world's
pleasures were the least of his gifts, for he gave me himself and
happiness. Behold me now: twelve long years have passed, and I waste and
decay; the wedded wife of shame; famine, sorrow, and remorse, my sole
companions."

This language was too plain. The blood rushed into Monina's face. "Oh,
love him not," continued the hapless penitent; "fly his love, because he
is beautiful, good, noble, worthy--fly from him, and thus preserve him
yours for ever."

Monina quickly recovered herself; she interrupted her imprudent
monitress, and calmly assured her that her admonition, though
unnecessary, should not prove vain; and then both she and York exerted
themselves to engage Jane's attention on topics relative to his cause,
his hopes, his partizans, thus exciting her curiosity and interest.

Richard passed the whole of the following day in this abode of penury
and desolation. That day, indeed, was big with dire event. The morning
rose upon Stanley's death. In Jane's hut the hollow bell was heard that
tolled the fatal hour. The ear is sometimes the parent of a livelier
sense than any other of the soul's apprehensive portals. In Italy, for
three days in Passion week, the sound of every bell and of every clock
is suspended. On the noon of the day when the mystery of the
Resurrection is solemnized, they all burst forth in one glad peel. Every
Catholic kneels in prayer, and even the unimaginative Protestant feels
the influence of a religion which speaks so audibly. And, in this more
sombre land, the sad bell that tolls for death strikes more melancholy
to the heart than the plumed hearse or any other pageantry of woe. In
silence and fear the fugitives heard the funereal knell sweep across the
desolate fields, telling them that at that moment Stanley died.

Women nurse grief--dwell with it. Like poor Constance, they dress their
past joys in mourning raiment, and so abide with them. But the masculine
spirit struggles with suffering. How gladly, that very evening, did the
duke hail Frion's arrival, who, in the garb of a saintly pardoner, came
to lead him from Jane's dim abode. In spite of his remonstrances, Monina
refused to accompany him: she should endanger him, she said; besides
that, his occupation would be to rouse a martial spirit among the
Yorkists--hers to seek the Adalid and her dear father's protection.

Frion procured a safe asylum for the prince: and here, no longer pressed
by the sense of immediate danger, his head was rife with projects, his
spirit burning to show himself first to the Yorkists, in a manner worthy
of his pretensions. The choice was hazardous and difficult: but it so
happened that it was notified that in a few weeks Lord Surrey's eldest
sister was to marry the Lord de Walden, and the ceremony was to be
graced with much feasting and a solemn tournament.

There was magic in all the associations with this family for Richard. In
his early infancy, Thomas Mowbray, the last of the dukes of Norfolk of
that name, died. It almost was beyond his recollection that he had been
married to the little Lady Anne, the duke's only child and heiress. She
died soon after; and the representative of the female branch of the
Mowbrays, John Howard was created duke of Norfolk by Richard the Third.
He fell at Bosworth; and his son, the earl of Surrey, though attaching
himself to Henry the Seventh, and pardoned and taken into favour, was
not permitted to assume his father's attainted title.

At this marriage-feast the mother of his Anne, the dowager duchess of
Norfolk, daughter of Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, so famous in the French
wars, would be present; and others of the Howard and Berkeley families,
all Yorkists once. The prince could not resist the temptation of
appearing on the lists that day, where, if success crowned him, as
surely it would, he could with prouder hopes call on Surrey to maintain
his claims. Frion got gallant armour for him, and contrived to have him,
under another name, inserted in the list of combatants.

York's bosom swelled with pride and exultation when he saw himself among
his countrymen--his subjects--with lance in rest and bright shield
upon his arm, about to tilt with England's noblest cavaliers. It seemed
to him as if he had never asked more of fortune--and the herald's
voice, the clarion's sound, the neigh of steeds, the gallant bearing of
the knights, and charmed circle of joyous beauty around, were like a
voice from beyond life, speaking of a Paradise he had left,--his own
native home. But one emotion of disquiet crossed him: as about to pass
the barrier, Frion put his hand on his rein, and whispered, "Beware of
Clifford!" The duke threw his eyes round the vizored throng. With what
gladness would he have singled him out, and met him in fierce, mortal
combat! A second thought told him that the dishonoured man could not
find place in this gallant company.

We will not dwell on the tilt, the thrust, and the parry, the
overthrowing of horses, and defeat of knights. Richard gloried in the
recollection of his Spanish combats, and the love he bore for martial
exercises, which made him, so boyish in figure, emulate the strong acts
of men. Fortune had varied: but, when at noon the pastime of that day
ended, the prince remained victor in the field. From the hand of the
queen of the feast he was receiving his reward, when Surrey, who had led
him to her throne, was suddenly called away. The assembly broke up; and
Richard was half occupied by polite attention to the countess, and half
by recollecting his peculiar situation, when the marshal of the lists
whispered him to follow--he led him to a gallery, where Surrey alone
was pacing backwards and forwards in great agitation. He stopped when
the prince entered--motioned the marshal to leave them, and then, in a
voice of suppressed passion, said, "I will not ask thee why with a false
appellation thou hast insulted the feast of nobles?--but well may I
ask, what fiend possessed thee to do a deed that affixes the taint of
disloyalty to King Henry's liege subject?"

"My good sword, my lord," said Richard, colouring, "were eloquent to
answer your questioning, but that you are much deceived; I am not indeed
that which I called myself; but honour, not disgrace, attaches itself to
my presence. I came to tell you this, to rouse the old fidelity of the
Howards; to bid Lord Surrey arm for the last of the true Plantagenets."

"Saint Thomas speed me! Clifford then spoke true--thou art Perkin
Warbeck?"

"I would fain," said the duke haughtily, "ask a revered lady, who claims
kindred with thee, what name she would give to her sainted daughter's
affianced husband?"

The language of truth is too clear, too complete, for the blots and
flaws of incredulity; the very anger Lord Surrey had manifested, now
turned to his confusion; the insult he had offered demanded reparation;
he could not refuse his visitant's earnest demand to be led to the widow
of Mowbray, duke of Norfolk.

Elizabeth, daughter of the gallant Talbot, was proud of her ancestry,
and disappointed in the diminution of her house. When her Anne was
affianced to the little duke of York, and the nobility of Norfolk was
merged in the royal style of England, she had gloried; since then,
attainder and defeat had eclipsed the ducal honours of her race; nor
could she forgive the allegiance of its heirs to Lancaster. Often had
she pondered on the reports concerning Margaret of Burgundy's White
Rose; it was with agitation therefore that she heard that he was to be
brought for her to decide on his truth.

The duke had doffed his helm: his golden hair clustered on the almost
infantine candour of his brow, and shaded to softer meaning the frank
aspect of his clear blue eyes. The aged duchess fixed her dimmed but
steady gaze upon him, and at once became aware that this was no ignoble
pretender who stood before her. His dignity inspired Surrey with
respect: he hesitated as he introduced the subject of his identity with
Edward the Fourth's youngest son. The duke, with a half-smile, began to
speak of his boyish recollections, and his little pretty playfellow, and
of one Mistress Margery, her governante; he spoke of a quarrel with his
infant bride on the very wedding-day, and how nothing would bribe him to
the ceremony, save the gift of a pretty foal, White Surrey, which
afterwards bore his uncle Gloucester in the battle of Bosworth. As he
spoke, he saw a smile mantle over the aged lady's countenance; and then
he alluded to his poor wife's death, and reminded the duchess, that when
clad in black, an infant widower, he had visited her in condolence; and
how the sad lady had taken a jewel-encircled portrait of her lost child,
garnished with the blended arms of Plantagenet and Mowbray, from his
neck, promising to restore it on an after-day, which day had never come.
Tears now rushed, into the duchess's eyes; she drew the miniature from
her bosom, and neither she nor Lord Surrey could longer doubt, that the
affianced husband of the noble Anne stood before them.

Much confusion painted the earl's countenance. The duke of York's first
involuntary act had been to stretch out his hand; but the noble
hesitated ere he could bestow on it the kiss of allegiance. Richard
marked his reluctance, and spoke with gallant frankness: "I am an
outcast," he said, "the victim of lukewarm faith and ill-nurtured
treason: I am weak, my adversary strong. My lord, I will ask nothing of
you; I will not fancy that you would revive the ancient bond of union
between York and Norfolk; and yet, were it not a worthy act to pull down
a base-minded usurper, and seat upon his father's throne an injured
prince?"

The duchess answered for him. "Oh, surely, my noble cousin will be no
recreant in this cause, the cause of our own so exalted lineage."

But Lord Surrey had different thoughts: it cost him much to express
them; for he had loved the House of York, and honoured and pitied its
apparent offspring. At length he overcame his feelings, and said, "And,
if I do not this, if I do not assist to replant a standard whose staff
was broken on the graves of our slaughtered fathers, will your highness
yet bear with me, while I say a few words in my defence?"

"It needs not, gallant Surrey," interrupted York.

"Under favour, it does need," replied the earl; "and withal touches mine
honour nearly, that it stand clear in this question. My lord, the Roses
contended in a long and sanguinary war, and many thousand of our
countrymen fell in the sad conflict. The executioner's axe accomplished
what the murderous sword spared, and poor England became a wide, wide
grave. The green-wood glade, the cultivated fields, noble castles, and
smiling villages were changed to churchyard and tomb: want, famine, and
hate ravaged the fated land. My lord, I love not Tudor, but I love my
country: and now that I see plenty and peace reign over this fair isle,
even though Lancaster be their unworthy viceregent, shall I cast forth
these friends of man, to bring back the deadly horrors of unholy civil
war? By the God that made me, I cannot? I have a dear wife and lovely
children, sisters, friends, and all the sacred ties of humanity, that
cling round my heart, and feed it with delight; these I might sacrifice
at the call of honour, but the misery I must then endure I will not
inflict on others; I will not people my country with widows and orphans;
nor spread the plague of death from the eastern to the western sea."

Surrey spoke eloquently well; for his heart was upon his lips. Prince
Richard heard with burning emotion. "By my fay!" he cried, "thou wouldst
teach me to turn spinster, my lord: but oh, cousin Howard! did you know
what it is to be an exiled man, dependent on the bounty of others;
though your patrimony were but a shepherd's hut on a wild nameless
common, you would think it well done to waste life to dispossess the
usurper of your right."




CHAPTER XXVII

THE LANDING AT HYTHE


     Farewell, kind lord, fight valiantly to-day.
     And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
     For thou art framed of the firm truth of valour.

                                                  SHAKSPEARE.


The duke of York was not of a temperament to sink supinely before the
first obstacles. Lord Surrey's deep-felt abjuration of war influenced
him to sadness, but the usual habit of his mind returned. He had been
educated to believe that his honour called on him to maintain his
claims. Honour, always a magic word with the good and brave, was then a
part of the religion of every pious heart. He had been nursed in
war--the javelin and the sword were as familiar to his hand as the
distaff and spindle to the old Tuscan crone. In addition, the present
occasion called for activity. The fleet, armed for invasion, prepared by
his noble aunt--manned by his exiled zealous friends--would soon
appear on the English coast, giving form and force to, while it
necessitated his purposed attempt.

He possessed in his secretary Frion, a counsellor, friend, and servant,
admirably calculated to prevent all wavering. This man's vanity,
lion-strong, was alive to insure his new master's success, and to
overthrow him by whom he had been discarded. He was an adept in
intrigue; an oily flatterer; a man of unwearied activity, both of mind
and body. It was his care to prevent York from suffering any of the
humiliations incident to his position. He obtained supplies of money for
him--he suffered none to approach who were not already full of
zeal--when he met with any failure, he proved logically that it was a
success, and magnified an escape into a victory--he worked day and
night to insure that nothing came near the prince, except through his
medium, which was one sugared and drugged to please. When he saw
Richard's clear spirit clouded by Lord Surrey, he demonstrated that
England could not suffer through him; for that in the battle it was a
struggle between partizans ready to lay down their lives in their
respective causes, so that, for their own sakes and pleasure, he ought
to call on them to make the sacrifice. As to the ruin and misery of the
land--he bade him mark the exactions of Henry; the penury of the
peasant, drained to his last stiver--this was real wretchedness;
devastating the country, and leaving it barren, as if sown with salt.
Fertility and plenty would speedily efface the light wound he must
inflict--nay, England would be restored to youth, and laugh through all
her shores and plains, when grasping Tudor was exchanged for the
munificent Plantagenet.

In one circumstance Frion had been peculiarly fortunate. The part he had
played of astrologer during the foregoing summer had brought him
acquainted with a young nobleman zealous in the cause of York, and well
able to afford it assistance. Lord Audley was of the west country, but
his maternal relations were Kentish, and he possessed a mansion and a
small estate not far from Hythe in Kent. Lord Audley was of a class of
men common all over the world. He had inherited his title and fortune
early in life, and was still a very young man. He loved action, and
desired distinction, and was disposed to enter readily into all the
turmoil and risk of conspiracy and revolt. His aim was to become a
leader: he was vain, but generous; zealous, but deficient in judgment.
He was a Yorkist by birth and a soldier by profession--all combined to
render him, heart and soul, the friend of the wandering Plantagenet.

Frion led York to the mansion of this noble, and it became the focus of
the spirit of sedition and discontent to the country round. The
immediate presence of the duke was concealed; but the activity of his
friends was not the less great to collect a band of partizans, to which,
when prepared and disciplined, they might present their royal leader.
Their chief purpose was to collect such a body of men as might give one
impetus to the comity, when the invading fleet should arrive on these
coasts from Burgundy. Time was wanting for the complete organization of
their plan; for each day they expected the vessels, and their operations
in consequence were a little abrupt. Still they were in hopes that they
should be enabled to assemble an armed force sufficient to facilitate
the landing and to insure the success of the expected troops. Day and
night these men were occupied in gathering together followers. It was
not long, however, before the wily secretary discovered that some one
was at work to counteract their schemes. Those he had left transported
with zeal for the cause yesterday, to-day he found lukewarm or icy cold.
Their enemy, whoever it might be, observed great mystery in his
proceedings; yet he appeared to have intuitive knowledge of theirs.
Frion exerted himself to discover the secret cause of all the
mischief--he was liberal of promises and bribes. One day he had
appointed a rendezvous for a party of recruits, about a hundred men, who
had been exercised for the last fortnight, and promised well--none
arrived at the appointed spot. Frion rode sorrowfully through the dusk
of the evening towards Lord Audley's dwelling. He was overtaken by a
horseman, with a slouched hat, and otherwise muffled up: he rode at his
side for a little way, quite mute to all Frion's courteous salutations;
and then he suddenly put spurs to his horse, and was out of sight in a
moment. Night grew darker; and at the mirk-embowered entrance of a shady
lane, Frion was startled by the tramp of a horse--it was the same
man:--"Maître Frion!" he cried.

"Sir Robert Clifford!"

"The same--I knew not that my voice was so treacherous," Clifford
began: he went on abruptly to declare that he was the counterminer; he,
the secret marplot of the sagacious Frenchman's schemes. He displayed in
all that he said a perfect knowledge of every transaction, and of the
prince's present residence. By'r Lady's grace, he might have brought
King Henry's archers to Lord Audley's very door! Wherefore he had not
done this seemed strange; his own account perplexed. In truth, this
wretched man, at war with guilt and with himself, loathed the dishonour
he had acquired. Like all evil-disposed persons, he had no idea of
purging himself from the foul stain by frank confession and reformation:
his project was to begin a new career in a new country: to go where his
own tarnished reputation was unknown, where the cankerous name of York
would poison no more his native language by its perpetual recurrence.
His violent passions led him also to other conclusions; he hated
Richard, and loved Monina; his desire to satisfy both these sentiments
suggested a project on which he now acted, and which dictated his
discourse with Frion. He showed how from that very spot he might ride to
London, and make disclosures to the king; his knowledge of every detail
of the Yorkist plans was startling--ruinous;--his offer was simply
this:--That the duchess of Burgundy should pay him a thousand golden
crowns; that the Spanish maiden, Monina, should consent to wed him; and
that they should seek together the golden isles of the western ocean,
leaving the old world for York to ruffle in.

Frion desired time: it was necessary to consult Richard, and also
Monina; where should they meet again? Clifford would appoint neither
time nor place:--"I shall find you," he said: "I may draw your curtain
at dead of night; come on you with an armed band of men, whom you think
all your own. I will choose my own hour, my own audience-chamber. You
have but to get the damsel's consent, and to tell her, an' you list,
that she were better as Robin Clifford's wife, than as the light-of-love
of the son of Jane Shore's gallant." With these words the knight rode
off; and being much better mounted than the secretary, put all pursuit
to defiance.

Frion was full of thought. He said nothing to the duke or Lord Audley;
but the following day hastened to visit Monina at Canterbury, where she
had resided latterly, in the character of a pilgrim to St. Thomas à
Becket's shrine. Frion had flattered himself that he could easily
persuade the young, inexperienced girl, whose ardour for York he had
often admired. Yet he felt uncomfortable when he saw her. Monina looked
a little pale, and her dark religious garb gave no adornment to her
beauty; but there was in the innocence and tenderness of her full dark
eye, in the soft moulding of the cheek which harmonized with the
beautiful lids, and in her


                             "sweet lips, like roses,
     With their own fragrance pale, which Spring but half uncloses."


--there was in all this a purity and soft appeal which even the
politician felt, who looked on mankind as mere agents in the drama he
caused to be acted. With some hesitation he brought out his story, but
of course grew bolder as he proceeded. Monina looked pained, but
said--"Double the number of crowns, and Sir Robert will content him. My
father will make my ransom good."

Clifford's speech and manner had convinced Frion that this would not be
the case; he tried to persuade Monina, and even repeated the knight's
insolent message. Her large eyes grew larger, dilating with surprise and
indignation. He little knows woman, who thinks to govern the timid thing
by threats. "Answer that bad man," she said, "thus: Monina will wed
death, rather than crime and treason. Good Master Frion, you have done
wrong by so insulting mine ears; it were enough to drive a poor girl to
eternal vows and a convent, to dream that such words are spoken of her;
and if I do not take that refuge, it is because I will not desert my
dear, fond, bereaved father--as soon I shall prove; meanwhile we must
not delay to secure our prince from his enemy's machinations. You know
Astley, the poor scrivener in this town? I defy Clifford to win him.
Bring his highness there, I will prepare him. We must show a boldness to
Clifford matching his own; let us be fearless for ourselves; and for the
White Rose we need not fear. Stay; Clifford watches you; I will provide
for the duke's safety."

That very night, by secret, unknown means (it might be through her gipsy
friend), Monina had communicated with York, and induced him to take
refuge with the man she named. Astley's father had been a soldier in the
cause of York, and had died on Bosworth Field, leaving an unprovided
widow and five children, one only among them being a son. From his youth
upward, the boy had struggled, not with privation on his own account, to
that he submitted without a murmur, but for the sake of his mother and
sisters, whom he loved with an ardour peculiar to his sensitive and
affectionate disposition. Weak in health and strength, he had betaken
himself to the occupation of a scrivener, so meagrely to support them.
It is probable that, in the frame of all, there was a delicacy of
organization that unfitted them for penury. One by one they died. That
spring had left Astley comparatively rich, because he could well support
himself, but miserable beyond words, for he idolized all and every one
of his lost relatives. Frion had, with unwearied care, made an accurate
enumeration of all in Canterbury who had ever favoured the White Rose.
Astley was on this fist; he saw him, and passed him over as useless.
Chance brought him and Monina together, who instantly detected his
latent, unpractised talents, his integrity and enthusiasm; now his
habitation occurred as an unsuspected and faithful asylum for her
persecuted friend.

Frion was still at work; Clifford came on him suddenly, and heard with
unrepressed rage his rejection by Monina; his threats were unmeasured;
but the moment for putting them into execution to their full extent had
gone by. On the very day that York arrived in safety at Canterbury, his
fleet was seen off Hythe. In the morning the vessels hove in sight;
towards evening they bore down upon land, and anchored in the offing.
The land-breeze rising at evening-tide secured them from the dangers of
a lee shore.

Hythe is situated at the water's edge. The cliffs, which at Dover beetle
so fearfully over the tremendous deep, have by degrees receded from
their apparent task of paling in the ocean, and as they retire inland,
lose their barren, precipitous aspect, and become green, wooded hills,
overlooking a grassy plain, which extends from their feet to the sands,
a distance of about half a mile. In the neighbourhood of Hythe a ravine,
the bed of a stream, divides these acclivities, which on one side are
abrupt, on the other softly rounded as they gradually disappear. Arcadia
seems to breathe from the fertile landscape; the sunny uplands, the
fringed banks of the rivulet, the darker shadows of the wooded hills,
are contrasted with the verdant meadows, on which cattle and sheep
graze. But the sea, the dark, dangerous sea, with barking waves and vast
encircling barrenness, suddenly checks the beauty of the earth, adding
magnificence to the pastoral prospect.

A few days before, some gipsies had pitched their tents near the stream:
some of the wanderers had strolled down to Hythe; but they were looked
on for the most part with suspicion and fear. Now, while at the close of
day most of the inhabitants of the little town were collected on the
beach, gazing on the anchored vessels, two stout-looking gipsy-men, with
one old woman of their tribe, were lying on the sands, occupied, in
their lazy way, by the same object, the vessels in sight. The people of
Hythe, fishers, or such poor traders as supplied the fishermen with a
few coarse necessaries, were roused from the usual monotony of their
lives by the aspect of this fleet. Added to these, there were three or
four mendicant friars; an old soldier or two, disabled in the wars of
the two Roses, and a few dependents on neighbouring nobles or Franklins;
while women and children of various ages filled up the group. They all
spoke of the fleet: it consisted of five armed vessels; two of these
were weather-beaten caravels, two were low-decked Flemish smacks, but
the fifth was one of prouder build, and it bore a flag of pretension on
its mizen. The French king and the Spaniard were spoken of first; some
thought it was a fleet which had sought the unknown, golden lands,
driven back upon the old world by the continuous west winds of the last
month; some said, they belonged to the duchy of Burgundy; there was a
spell in that word; no one knew who first whispered the name; none could
guess whence or wherefore the conjecture arose, but the crowd broke into
smaller groups; their talk declined into whispers as "York," "Duke
Perkin," "The White Rose," "The duchess of Burgundy," were mentioned;
and the fleet grew as they spoke into a mighty armada, freighted with
invasion, ready to disembark an army, to ravage and conquer the island.

As soon as the appearance and nature of these vessels became confirmed,
the gipsies arose from their indolent posture and retreated to their
encampment. A few minutes afterwards, a wild-looking youth on a shaggy
horse, without a saddle, trotted off at a quick pace through the ravine
to the inland country. Lord Audley and Frion heard from him of the
arrival of their friends, who they had expected would have been delayed
for another month. Frion instantly set off for Canterbury to apprise the
prince; and the noble lost no time in collecting his retainers and
hastening to Hythe. Clifford's spies brought him word also of the
arrival of the fleet. Ill luck attended his guiles. King Henry was in
the north: there was no time to apprise him, and Clifford's underhand
proceedings might turn out bitterly to his disadvantage. He had nothing
for it but to endeavour to be the first to convey the already-blown news
to Sir John Peachy, sheriff for Kent: his pains were rewarded by his
being detained prisoner as a suspected person, while Sir John mustered
his yeomanry, and, together with the neighbouring gentry and their
retainers, marched towards Hythe. The wavering people, awed by this show
of legal and military power, grew cool towards the White Rose, whose
name, linked to change and a diminution of taxation, had for a moment
excited their enthusiasm. Some had assumed the snowy badge, and
collected in groups; but they tore it off when the magistrate appeared;
he thanked them for arming for their king, and they, in much fear and
some wonder, joined his standard.

Sir John advanced with his increasing troop towards the village in
question. He was informed that a band of the prince's friends was there
before him, consisting of a few Yorkist gentlemen and their retainers.
His first idea was to disperse them; his second, "No; this will serve as
a decoy; every coast may not be prepared; driven too speedily hence, the
armament may make good their landing elsewhere: if we appear unguarded,
they will disembark, and fall into our hands." This policy had good
effect; the two smaller Dutch vessels and one of the caravels ran as
close in shore as their soundings permitted, and hastily landed a part
of the troops. The commanders of the expedition on board the fleet had
been in considerable anxiety; they had hoped to find the country raised
to receive them; they saw but a handful of men; still signs were made
to them to disembark; and, eager to insure the safety of their prince,
they in part obeyed, landing about two hundred and fifty men, with
Mountford, Corbet, and some other distinguished exiles, at their head.
York and Frion had not yet had time to arrive from Canterbury; Lord
Audley and his friends received the troops, and held consultation with
their chiefs. It was resolved to go forward, and penetrate into the
country, to raise it if possible; and, as they had not yet heard of Sir
John Peachy's advance, to forestall resistance by their speed.

They marched forward in good order for nearly ten miles, when they
halted; their scouts here brought intelligence of a regular force of at
least two thousand men who were near at hand, advancing against them.
Audley advised a deviation from their line of march, so as to enter the
county in a different direction; Mountford proposed to fortify
themselves in Hythe; Corbet to re-embark with all speed on board their
vessels. While they deliberated, it was reported that another troop of
the king's men were posted in their rear, while a herald from the
sheriff called on them to lay down their arms and to submit. Already a
panic ran through this knot of men; already their coward hands dropped
their weapons, ready to be held out for servile cords, signs of terror
increased by the near tramp of Peachy's soldiers and the sound of
martial music.

At this moment of irresolution, four persons were seen at the top of a
neighbouring eminence; one was a knight in complete armour, the others
were more peacefully attired; they paused a moment gazing on the scene
below; then the three pursued their way over the hills towards the sea;
the cavalier came riding down at a furious pace; Lord Audley advanced
towards him. "All is lost!" he cried.

"Or won!" exclaimed the prince; "surely Neville and my good cousin will
send us reinforcements. How strong are ye on board, Mountford?"

"About six hundred; two of which are German well-trained auxiliaries;
but we hoped to find an ally army."

"Treason, Sir John, is stronger to break, than truth to bind. Ye are
mad; better not have landed at all than thus."

A few scattered shot from Peachy's advanced guard broke in upon these
regrets; Richard in a moment recollected that this was a time for
action, not for words. He issued a few commands as to the position of
his troops, and riding to their front addressed them: "My merry men, and
very good friends," he cried, "let us recollect that we are soldiers;
our lives depend upon our swords; draw them for the right, and be strong
in it. Our enemies are chiefly raw recruits; cold friends of a
tyrant-usurper; but they are many, and death is before us; behind our
vessels, the wide ocean, safety and freedom; we must retreat, not as
cowardly fugitives, but as men who, while they see, fear not their
danger."

The order of the march was speedily established. While the rear
retrograded, Richard, with a hundred chosen men, made a stand, receiving
so well the first onset of their assailants, that they were staggered
and driven back.

"In good hour, spare neither whip nor spur," cried York; and turning his
horse's head, he galloped towards his retreating friends. Peachy, who
believed that he had them in his toils, followed slowly and in good
order. For the first five miles all went well; but when the hills
approached and grew more abrupt, forming by degrees a narrow ravine,
they found this post guarded by the enemy. "Betrayed!" cried Audley; "we
ought to have traversed the hills; now we are between two fires."

"Silence!" said Richard, sternly; "we must give courage to these poor
fellows, not deprive them of it--fear you for your life, baron? By my
fay, I had rather mine were spilt, than that of the meanest of our men!"

Combat like this York had shared in the ravines of Andalusia: he
remembered that warfare, and founded his present operations upon it. His
onset was impetuous; the enemy recoiled, but formed again. The horsemen
dismounted, and presented a frightful bulwark of iron-headed lances to
the horses of the little troop; while, from the intervals in the ranks,
the archers and men armed with matchlocks kept up a rain of arrows and
bullets, that spread consternation among his troop. It was necessary to
break through this formidable defence; thrice the prince charged in
vain; the third time his standard-bearer fell; he wore a white scarf; he
fixed it to his lance, and drawing his sword, he waved this emblem of
his cause as again he dashed forwards, and with greater success; yet, as
he drove the enemy before him, the whiz of bullets and arrows from
behind showed that their previous resistance had given Sir John Peachy
time to come up. York grasped Audley's hand: "Farewell," he cried,
"forgive my hasty speech, my valiant friend; may we meet in paradise,
where surely, through God's grace, we shall sup this night."

With the words he charged again, and overcame the last faint resistance.
Followed by all his troop, pursuing the flying, Richard dashed through
the defile: soon the open plain was before them, and he saw the wide,
calm, free ocean, with his vessels riding at anchor. The decks were
crowded with men, and the water covered with boats, hovering near shore,
as they waited to receive tidings of their friends.

Before in the van, Richard now hung back to secure the retreat of those
behind. Audley urged him to embark; but he moved slowly towards the
beach, now calling his men to form and gather round him, now marking the
motions of those behind, ready to ride back to their aid. At length
Peachy's troops poured through the defile; the plain was covered by
flying Yorkists: it only remained for him to assemble as many as he
could, to protect and insure the embarkation of all.

"One word," cried Audley; "whither do you propose to sail?"

"It is doubtful; if Barry still be true, and my voice be heard, not to
Burgundy and dependence, but rather to Ireland, to Cork and Desmond."

"Meanwhile, dear your highness," said the noble, "I will not believe
that all is lost in England. I shall make good speed to the West, and
gather my friends together; we shall not be distant neighbours; and if I
succeed to my wish, Audley will call you from your Irish fastnesses to
your own native England. Our Lady preserve you meanwhile--farewell!"

Audley, swift in all his proceedings, put spurs to his horse, and was
away. A few minutes brought Richard to the sands; he guarded the
embarkation of his diminished numbers; nor, till Peachy's troop was
within bowshot, and the last straggler that arrived was in the last
boat, did he throw himself from his horse and leap in; he was rowed to
the chief vessel. He cast an anxious glance at the _Adalid_, just under
weigh; a green and white flag was hoisted; Monina was on board. Further
to reassure him of his friends' safety, Frion received him as he mounted
on his own deck. Evening was at hand--the late balmy summer evening; a
land breeze sprung up; the vessels had already weighed their anchors,
and swiftly, with swelling sails, they gained the offing. How tranquil
and sweet seemed the wide-spread waters; how welcome these arks of
refuge, sailing placidly over them, after the strife, the blood, the
shouts, the groans of battle. "Farewell, England," said the royal exile;
"I have no country, save these decks trodden by my friends--where they
are, there is my kingdom and my home!"




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE PARTING


     Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot:
     And then the power of Scotland and of York
     To join----
     In faith it is exceedingly well aimed!

                                         SHAKSPEARE.


The duke of York found Lord Barry, Sir George Neville, Plantagenet, and
several other distinguished friends, on board his vessel. In
consultation with them, it was agreed to sail immediately for Cork. The
loss of many brave friends, killed or prisoners, on the Kentish coast,
saddened them: while the diminution of their numbers forbade the idea of
a second descent upon England. Towards Ireland they sailed, with such
alternation of calm and contrary winds as made them linger for several
weeks upon their way. Here, for the first time, Richard heard from Frion
of Clifford's machinations, and of his message and insolent threat to
Monina. Every drop of blood in his veins was alive with indignation:
before, he had despised Sir Robert as a traitor; and, while he looked on
him as the cause of all his disasters, and of the death of so many of
his noble and gallant adherents, his abhorrence was mingled with
contemptuous pity. The unchivalrous wrong offered to a woman, that woman
his sweet sister-friend, animated him with other feelings: to avenge
her, and chastise the arrogant braggart, was his knightly duty, his
fervent, impatient wish. He saw her not meanwhile; she was in one of
those dark hulls, among which love alone taught him to discern the
lighter build and more sea-worn frame of the _Adalid_.

Ireland was at this time very differently situated from when the prince
first landed on her shores. After Lambert Simnel's success there, still
the king of England had neglected its internal policy. A more terrible
name awakened his caution; and he sent Sir Edward Poynings, as the
deputy of his infant son Henry, whom he had nominally appointed to the
government. Poynings was resolute and successful. He defeated the
natives, quelled the earl of Kildare, and forced the earl of Desmond to
renew his oaths of allegiance. A free pardon was afterwards granted to
all, with the exception of Lord Barry.

York was received at Cork most cordially by his old friend O'Water, and
immediately, at the earl of Desmond's invitation, repaired to Ardfinnin.
The earl had found no great difficulty in escaping from England, and
returning to his native island. The timely assistance he had afforded
Henry's enemy in the Tower was an impenetrable mystery, though the
consciousness of it had made him more yielding than he would otherwise
have been in his concessions to Poynings. He received York with the
hospitality of an Irish chieftain, and the kindness of a friend. But he
held out no inducement for him to remain: on the contrary, he was the
first to counsel him to turn his eyes, where a new and brighter prospect
presented itself. Sir Patrick Hamilton had left Munster a few months
before, with a firm belief in Richard's truth; he had assured the earl
of the favourable reception his adventurous friend would obtain from his
royal master, and had declared his intention of proceeding to Brussels
to see the prince, and personally to enforce his invitation. York was
absent; but the duchess gave a cordial reception to the renowned
Scottish cavalier. He had been present at the sailing of the fleet; and
his last words were wishes for their success, and an offer of secure and
honourable refuge in Edinburgh, in case of failure. It had been agreed,
that on his own return thither, he should be accompanied by messengers
from the duchess, to thank the king of Scotland for the interest he
manifested towards her beloved nephew. Sir Edward Brampton was chosen as
the chief of these, accompanied, of course, by his lady, York's
long-tried and zealous friend.

All these circumstances were decisive of the course it became the exile
to pursue. He was at that moment in a condition to appear under
advantageous circumstances at the Scottish court. He had lost several
valued friends during the late attempt; but many remained of noble birth
and good renown. Above a hundred knights graced his train. The treasure
his aunt had bestowed for his English struggle remained, besides a
considerable sum of money, services of valuable plate and valuable
jewels, the munificent gift of the dowager duchess of Norfolk. In fine,
not a dissentient voice was raised; and the attention of every one was
turned towards preparations for the voyage. York continued to be the
earl of Desmond's guest: in his princely halls he received all the
honour due to his rank and pretensions. The countess, a lady of the
noble family of Roche, distinguished him by her kindness, and conceived
a peculiar friendship for the Spanish maiden, Monina.

The moment arrived for York's embarkation. He had visited his vessels,
and seen that all was in readiness; but his surprise was excited by
perceiving that no preparations were made for sailing on board the
_Adalid_. This was explained on his return, by the countess telling him
that a friend of his desired to take leave of him before he sailed, and
that she had been besought by her to explain in some measure the reasons
of their separation. De Faro's whole soul was set upon becoming one of
those immortal pioneers who opened new paths across the unexplored west.
He could be of no use to Richard in Scotland; but he could not prevail
on himself to leave his lovely, unprotected girl behind. She had at last
consented to accompany him in his far and dangerous voyage.

Many had been this poor child's struggles, sad her reflections, ere she
wrought herself to this purpose. "Alas!" such were her reveries, "that
innocence should be no safeguard in this ill world! If indeed I loved
him sinfully, or he sought me wrongfully, I should simply obey the laws
of God in flying him; but he is noble, and I know my own heart. Spotless
Mother of God, thou knowest it!--there is no single feeling in my
woman's soul that I dare not avouch to thy all-blessed gentleness! I ask
only to live in the same land, to breathe the same air, to serve him at
his need, to associate with his friends; so that when I see him not, I
may feed upon discourse of him. This is all I ask--all!--and this must
not be! I cannot bear a tainted name; I cannot endure that, linked with
any slightest stain of calumny, my image should haunt his dreams; nor
that he or any human being should suffer through me, which may so easily
happen: for if words like those Frion reported should reach my father's
ears, he would clothe his tempest-shaken limbs in arms, and expose his
breast to the sharp sword's point, to vindicate my honour. No!--no
tragedy shall be associated with poor Monina's name; nor agony nor woe
shall visit those I love, through me: they shall not even commiserate my
sufferings; these shall be garnered up in my own heart, watched with a
miser's care. I will not enrich the tell-tale air by one sigh; nor
through my broken heart shall the gloom of my despair appear. I will
paint my face with joy's own hue; put sunshine in my eyes: my hapless
love shall be no tale of pity for any, save my own desolate thoughts.
Nor let me forget every lesson of resignation, nor the dear belief I
cherish in the protection and goodness of my sainted guardianess. Let me
rejoice at much that exalts my destiny in my own eyes. The prince's
friendship, affection, gratitude, and esteem are mine: I have been able
to serve him I love--am I not sufficiently fortunate? He needs me no
more; but I am no alien upon earth. I shall give delight to my dear
father by accompanying him over the untrod watery deserts: through
me--for, if I went not, he would remain behind--the name of De Faro
will be added to the list of those who bestow a new creation of supernal
beauty on our out-worn world. He will call me the partner of his glory;
and, though that be a vain word, his dark eyes will flash with joy. My
dear, dear father! Should the prince succeed and ascend his rightful
throne, more impassable than that wide sea would be the gulph which
ceremony would place between us; and if he fall--ah! mine is no
summer's day voyage; the tornados of that wild region may wreck me; the
cold sea receive me in her bosom; and I shall never hear of Richard's
overthrow, nor endure the intolerable pang of knowing that he dies."

Fortified in some degree by such thoughts, anxious to conceal her
sorrows from one who might compassionate, yet not wholly share them,
Monina met Richard with an air of gaiety: glad, in spite of his
involuntary mortification, that she should be spared any pain, he copied
her manner; and a spectator would have thought, that either they parted
for a few hours, or were indifferent to each other. He could not help
betraying some anxiety however, when Lady Desmond, who was present,
solicited him to make his friend change her purpose, and drew a
frightful picture of the hazardous voyage, the storms, the likelihood
that they might be driven far, far away, where no land was, where they
would perish of famine on the barren, desolate ocean. Monina
laughed--she endeavoured thus to put aside her friend's serious
entreaties; and, when she found that she failed, she spoke of the
Providence that could protect her even on the wastes of innavigable
ocean; and proudly reminded him, that she would trust her father, whose
reputation as a mariner stood foremost among those in the king of
Portugal's employ. Richard looked perplexed--sorrow and pain spoke in
his own countenance; while she, true to herself to the last, said, "I
have now told you my purpose--but this is no farewell; to-morrow we
meet again; and another to-morrow will come also, when I bring treasure
from my Indian isle to dazzle the monarch of fair, happy England."

On that morrow Richard sought in vain among the countess of Desmond's
companions for his sweet Spaniard; he imaged her as he last saw her,
light, laughing, her soft-beaming eyes hardly daring to glance towards
him, while he fancied that a shower of precious drops was shaken from
their fringed lids. He had meant to say, "Ah! weep, Monina, weep for
Andalusia--for our happy childhood--for the hopes that leaves us: thy
tears will seem to me more glad than thy untrue smile." But she was not
there. Could he have seen her from the deck of his vessel, marking its
progress from the watch-tower of Youghall, he had been satisfied. The
anguish of bitter tears, the heart's agonizing gaspings, were hers, to
be succeeded by the dull starless night of despair, when his sail
vanished on the glittering plains of the sunny sea.

Farewell to her who mourned; to her who saw neither day nor joy, whose
heart lived with him, while she prepared for her melancholy separation
from the very world which he inhabited.

The scene shifts to Scotland; and hither, to a new country, a new
people, almost to a new language, our royal adventurer is transported.
Dark, tumultuous, stained with blood, and rendered foul by treason, are
the pages of early Scottish history. A wild and warlike people inhabited
its mountainous districts, whose occupation was strife, whose religion
was power and revenge. The Lowlanders, a wealthier race, were hardly
more cultivated or less savage. One course of rebellion against the
sovereign, and discord among themselves, flows, a sanguinary stream from
the hidden sources of things, threading a long track of years, or
overflowing it with its pernicious waves. Discord, hate, and murder were
the animating spirits of the scene.

James the Third was a weak, unhappy man. A prophecy had induced him to
distrust all the princes of his house--he extended this distrust to his
son, who was brought up consequently in a kind of honourable and obscure
imprisonment. He fostered unworthy favourites; and many bold and
sanguinary revolts had been the consequence. On one occasion, while
encamped during a foray into England, his nobles had seized on all his
personal friends and adherents, and hanged them over London Bridge. The
last rebellion cost him his life. The insurgents seized on, and placed
at their head, his eldest son, then only sixteen years of age--they met
their sovereign in the field--he fled before them; and his death was as
miserable and dastardly as his life.

James the Fourth succeeded to the throne. The mean jealousy of his
father had caused him to be untutored; but he was one of those beings,
who by nature inherit magnanimity refinement, and generosity. His faults
were those that belong to such a character. His imagination was active,
his impulses warm but capricious. He was benignant to every other,
severe only in his judgment of himself. His father's death, to which he
had been an unwilling accessary, weighed like parricide on his
conscience. To expiate it, in the spirit of those times, he wore
perpetually an iron girdle, augmenting the weight each year, as habit or
increasing strength lightened the former one. He devoted much of his
life to penance and prayer. Here ended, however, all of the ascetic in
his disposition. He was a gallant knight and an accomplished gentleman.
He encouraged tourneys and passages of arms, raising the reputation of
the Scottish cavaliers all over Europe, so that many noble foreigners
repaired to Edinburgh, to gain new trophies in contests with the heroes
of the north. He passed edicts to enforce the schooling of the children
of the nobles and lairds. His general love of justice, a little impaired
it is true by feudal prejudices, often led him to wander in disguise
over his kingdom; seeking hospitality from the poor, and listening with
a candid and generous mind to every remark upon himself and his
government.

He was singularly handsome, graceful, prepossessing, and yet dignified
in his manners. He loved pleasure, and was the slave of the sex, which
gives to pleasure all its elegance and refinement; he partook his
family's love for the arts, and was himself a poet and a musician; nay
more, to emulate the divine patron of these accomplishments, he was
well-skilled in surgery, and the science of healing. He was ambitious,
active, energetic. He ruminated many a project of future glory;
meanwhile his chief aim was to reconcile the minds of the alienated
nobles--his murdered father's friends--to himself; and, succeeding in
this, to abolish the feuds that raged among the peers of Scotland, and
civilize their barbarous propensities. He succeeded to a miracle. His
personal advantages attracted the affection of his subjects; they were
proud of him, and felt exalted by his virtues. His excellent government
and amiable disposition, both united to make his reign peaceful in its
internal policy, and beneficial to the kingdom. The court of Holyrood
vied with those of Paris, London, and Brussels; to which capitals many
of his high-born subjects, no longer engaged in the struggles of party,
travelled; bringing back with them the refinements of gallantry, the
poetry, learning, and science of the south of Europe. The feuds, last
flickerings of the dying torch of discord, which lately spread a fatal
glare through the land, ceased; if every noble did not love, they all
obeyed their sovereign--thus a new golden age might be said to have
dawned upon this eyrie of Boreas, this tempestuous Thule of the world.

We must remember that this was the age of chivalry; the spirit of
Edward the Third and the princely dukes of Burgundy yet survived. Louis
the Eleventh, in France, had done much to quench it; it burnt bright
again under the auspices of his son. Henry the Seventh was its bitter
enemy; but we are still at the beginning of his reign, while war and
arms were unextinguished by his cold avaricious policy. James of
Scotland laboured, and successfully, to pacify his subjects, children of
one common parent; but he, as well as they, disdained the ignoble arts
of peace. England formed the lists where they desired to display their
courage; war with England was a word to animate every heart to dreadful
joy: in the end, it caused the destruction of him and all his chivalry
in Flodden Field; now it made him zealous to upraise a disinherited
prince; so that under the idea of restoring the rightful sovereign to
the English throne, he might have fair pretext for invading the
neighbour kingdom. At the hope, the soldiers of Scotland--in other
words, its whole population--awakened, as an unhooded hawk, ready to
soar at its accustomed quarry.

Sir Patrick Hamilton, the most accomplished and renowned of the Scottish
cavaliers, and kinsman of the royal house, had returned laden with every
testimony of the White Rose's truth, and a thousand proofs of his
nobleness and virtue. Sir Edward Brampton delivered the duchess's
message of thanks; and his lady had already awakened the zeal of many a
gentleman, and the curiosity and interest of many a lady, for the pride
of York, the noble, valiant Plantagenet. Woman's sway was great at
Holyrood; as the bachelor king, notwithstanding his iron girdle, and his
strict attention to his religious duties, was a devout votary at the
shrine of feminine beauty.

There was a hawking party assembled in the neighbourhood of Stirling,
which he graced by his presence. All was, apparently, light-heartedness
and joy, till a dispute arose between two damsels upon the merits of
their respective falcons. One of these was fair Mary Boyd, daughter of
the laird of Bonshaw. Mary Boyd was the first-love of the young
sovereign, and the report went, that he was no unsuccessful suitor; it
spoke of offspring carefully concealed in a village of Fife, whom James
often visited. When, afterwards, this young lady's example was imitated
by others nobly born, this became no secret, and of her children, one
became archbishop of St. Andrew's--the other, a daughter, married the
earl of Morton.

But these were days of youthful bashfulness and reserve; the mind of
Mary Boyd balanced between pride in her lover, and shame for her fault;
a state of feeling that ill brooked the loss of what gilded her too
apparent frailty--the exclusive attention of the king. Mary was older
than the king; the dignity which had captivated the boy's imagination,
lost its charm when the tyranny of assumed right took the place of that
of tenderness. He grew cold, then absent, and at last, ventured to fix a
regard of admiration on another, sliding easily from the restraint to
which he at first submitted, into all of devotion, and soft, gallant
courtesy, by which kings win ladies' love, and in which none grew to be
a greater adept than James. The new object that attracted him was, the
young, gay, and lovely Lady Jane Kennedy, daughter of the earl of
Cassils. Her sparkling eyes, her "bonny brent brow," her dark,
clustering hair, contrasted with the transparency of her
complexion--her perfect good-humour, her vivacity, and her wit--made
her a chief beauty in the Scottish court, and in all this she was the
reverse of the fair, light-haired, sleepy-eyed Mary. Lady Jane saw and
gloried in her triumph over the king. Innocent then, she only desired
the reputation of such a conquest, fully resolved not to tread in the
steps of her rival. It is something of fool's play to strive to enchain
fire by links of straw, to throw silken fetters on abounding torrent, to
sport with the strong lion, Love, as he were a playful whelp: some,
secure in innocence and principle, may at last discover their mistake
and remain uninjured; but not the vain, heedless, self-willed, Lady
Jane. The courtiers were divided in their attentions; some for shame
would not forsake Mary Boyd; some thought that still she would regain
her power; one or two imagined that Lady Jane's resistance would restore
the king to her rival; but the greater number caught the light spirit of
the hour, and gathered round the laughing, happy girl.

The contention between these ladies made many smile. The king betted a
diamond against a Scotch pebble on Lady Jane's bird. Mary had thwarted
him, and forced him to her side during the first part of the day--now
he took his revenge. A heron rose from the river banks. The birds were
unhooded, and up soared Lady Jane's in one equal flight through the blue
air, cleaving the atmosphere with noiseless wing. Mary's followed
slower; but, when Lady Jane's pounced on the quarry, and brought it
screaming and flapping to the ground, the rival bird darted on the
conqueror, and a sharp struggle ensued. It was unequal; for the Lady
Jane's hawk would not quit its prey. "Let them fight it out," said Mary,
"and the survivor is surely the victor."

But the spectators cried shame--while Lady Jane, with a scream,
hastened to save her favourite. The other, fiery as a borderer, attacked
even her; and, in spite of her gloves, drops of blood from her fair
hand, stained her silken robe. James came to her rescue, and with one
blow put an end to the offender's life. Jane caressed her "tassel
gentle," while Mary looted on her "false carrion's" extinction with
unrepressed indignation. They returned to Stirling: immediately on their
arrival, they received tidings that the duke of York's fleet had been
descried, and was expected to enter the Frith on the following day. None
heard the words without emotion; the general sentiment was joy; for
Richard's landing was to be the signal of invasion. King Henry had one
or two friends among the Scottish nobles, and these alone smiled
contemptuously.

"We must have feasts and tourneys, fair mistress," said the king, "to
honour our royal visitor. Will your servant intrude unseemingly if,
while his arms extol your beauty, he wears your colours?"

Lady Jane smiled a reply, as she followed her father towards his
mansion. She smiled, while feminine triumph beamed in her eye, and
girlish bashfulness blushed in her cheek. "Has she not a bonny ee?"
cried James, to him who rode near him. It was Sir Patrick Hamilton, his
dear cousin and friend, to whom James often deferred, and respected,
while he loved. His serious look recalled the king. "This is not the
time, good sooth!" he continued, "for such sweet gauds--but for lance,
and broadsword:--the coming of this prince of Roses will bring our arms
into play, all rusty as they are. I wonder what presence our guest may
have!"

The friends then conversed concerning the projected war, which both
agreed would be well-timed. It would at once give vent to the fiery
impulses of the Scotch lords, otherwise apt to prey upon each other. But
lately a band of the Drummonds had burnt the kirk of Moulward, in which
were six-score Murrays, with their wives and children, all of whom were
victims. But foray in England--war with the land of their hate--the
defiance would be echoed in glad shouts from Tweed to Tay, from the
Lothians to the Carse of Gowrie; while it should be repeated in groans
from the Northumberland wilds.




CHAPTER XXIX

WELCOME TO SCOTLAND


     Cousin of York, thus once more we embrace thee;
     Welcome to James of Scotland! For thy safety,
     Know, such as love thee not shall never wrong thee.
     Come, we will taste awhile our court delights,
     Dream hence afflictions past, and then proceed
     To high attempts of honour.

                                                  FORD.


The duke of York arrived off Leith. While the messengers were going to
and fro, and preparation was made to disembark, he and his principal
friends were assembled on the deck of their vessel, regarding; this
strange northern coast with curiosity, wonder, and some contempt.

"I see horses," cried Lord Barry; "by'r Lord's grace, grass grows
hitherward--that is much!"

"I see kye," exclaimed Frion, "so we may hope for buttered sowans at
least, if not beef, at the palace of feasts."

"Ay," cried Sir Edward Brampton, who had come on board, "you may hope
for choice cheer. I promise ye shall live well, ye that are
noble--these unclad rocks and desert moors are the home of many an earl
and belted knight, whose gorgeousness may vie with the cavaliers of
France or Burgundy. In this it differs from England, ye will not find
stout franklins or fat burgesses; there are no men of Ghent, nor London
aldermen: the half-naked kern tills the stony soil. Next to the palace
is the hearthless hovel. Wealth and penury, if not mates, are joint
masters of the land."

"I have heard," said York, "that there is much paternal love and filial
duty between the rich and poor in this country."

"Among the northern mountains thus it is," said Brampton; "a strange and
savage race, which, my good Lord Barry, some name Irish, dwell on the
barren heights, along the impassable defiles, beside their vast stormy
lakes; but the Lowlander looks askance on the Highland clanship. List
ye, gentlemen; all bears a different aspect here from the gentle
southern kingdoms; but they are men, proud, valiant, warlike men, as
such they claim our respect. His majesty and a few others are moreover
right gallant cavaliers."

"Mark these words," said York, earnestly, "and remember, dear friends,
that we, the world's wanderers, seek refuge here of our own will, which
if we find, we must not disdain our hosts. Remember, too, the easy rage
of the fiery Scot; and that we boast gentler customs: suffer no brawling
to mar our concord; let not Richard of York, who of all his wide realm
possesses your hearts only, find his dominions narrowed, or violently
disturbed by your petulance and pride."

The duke's associates listened with respect. Hitherto the spirited boy
had been led by a Barry, a Clifford, a Neville, or a Plantagenet. They
had counselled, spoken for him; his sword only had been as active as
theirs. A new light seemed to have broken in upon his soul; it assumed a
seriousness and power that exalted him in their eyes, while it took
nothing from the candour and single-hearted reliance on their loves,
which was his dearest charm.

On landing, the duke of York was escorted to Edinburgh by the earl of
Errol, Sir Patrick Hamilton, and others. The attire, arms, and horses,
with their caparisons, of these gentlemen, were little inferior to those
displayed at Paris. King James awaited him at the castle of Edinburgh.
The monarch received his guest in state on his throne. The prince was
struck at once by his elegance, his majesty, and sweet animated aspect:
his black bonnet, looped up by a large ruby, sat lightly on his brow,
his glossy black curly hair escaping in ringlets from underneath; his
embroidered shirt-collar, thrown back, displayed his throat, and the
noble expression of his head; his dark grey eyes, his manly sun-burnt
complexion, the look of thought, combined with goodness, mingled with
dignity, gave an air of distinction to his whole person. Various were
the physiognomies, various the guises, of those around him. The swart,
gaunt Highlander, in his singular costume; the blue-eyed, red-haired
sous of the Lowlands were there; and in each and all were remarkable a
martial, sometimes a ferocious, expression.

The prince of England entered, surrounded by his (to the Scotch)
foreign-looking knights.

James descended from his throne to embrace his visitant, and then
re-assumed it, while all eyes were turned upon the royal adventurer,
whose voice and mien won every heart, before his eloquence had time to
move them. "High and mighty king," said Richard, "your grace, and these
your nobles present, be pleased to hear the tragedy of one, who, born a
prince, comes even as a beggar to your court. My lords, sorrow and I
were not twins: I am the elder, and for nine years I beheld not the
ill-visage of that latest birth of my poor but royal mother's fortunes.
It were a long tale to tell, what rumour has made familiar to every ear:
my uncle Gloucester's usurpation; my brother's death; and the sorrows of
our race. I lost my kingdom ere I possessed it; and while yet my young
hands were too feeble to grasp the sceptre of my ancestors, and, with
it, the sword needful to defend the same, capricious fate bestowed it on
Henry of Richmond; a base-born descendant of ill-nurtured Bolingbroke; a
scion of that Red Rose that so long and so rightfully had been uprooted
in the land, which they had bought with its children's dearest blood.

"Good, my lords, I might move you to pity did I relate how, in my tender
years, that usurer king sought my life, buying the blood of the
orphan at the hands of traitors. How, when these cruelties failed him,
he used subtler arts; giving me nicknames; meeting my gallant array of
partizans, not with an army of their peers, but with a base rout of
deceits, treasons, spies, and blood-stained decoyers. It would suit me
better to excite your admirations by speaking of the nobleness and
fidelity of my friends; the generosity of the sovereigns who have shed
invaluable dews upon the fading White Rose, so to refresh and restore
it.

"But not to waste my tediousness on you, let this be the sum. I am here,
the friend of France, the kinsman of Burgundy; the acknowledged lord of
Ireland; pursued by my powerful foe, I am here, king of Scotland, to
claim your friendship and your aid. Here lies the accomplishment of my
destiny! The universal justice to be rendered me, which I dreamed of in
my childhood, the eagle hopes of my youth, my better fortunes, and
future greatness, have fled me. But here they have found a home; here
they are garnered up; render them back to me, my lord; unlock with the
iron key of fatal battle the entrance to those treasures, all mine own,
whose absence renders me so poor. Arm for me Scotland; arm for the
right! Never for a juster cause could you buckle breast-plate, or poize
your lance. Be my captain, and these your peers, my fellow-soldiers.
Fear not, but that we vanquish; that I gain a kingdom; you eternal glory
from your regal gift. Alas! I am as a helmless vessel drifting towards
the murderous rock; but you, as the strong north-wind, may fill the
flapping sails, and carry me on my way with victory and gladness."

A murmur filled the presence-chamber: dark Douglas grasped his sword;
Hamilton's eyes glanced lightnings; not one there but felt his heart
beat with desire to enforce the illustrious exile's right. The tide of
rising enthusiasm paused as James arose; and deep attention held them
all. He descended from his throne. "My royal brother," he said, "were I
a mere errant knight, so good and high I esteem your cause, without more
ado I would don my armour, and betake me to the field. The same power
which enables me to afford you far better succour than the strength of
one arm, obliges me to pause and take council, ere I speak what it is in
my heart to promise. But your highness has made good your interests
among my counsellors; and I read in their gestures the desire of war and
adventure for your sake. Deem yourself an exile no more. Fancy that you
have come from merry England to feast with your brother in the north,
and we will escort you back to your capital in triumphant procession,
showing the gaping world how slighter than silky cobwebs are the
obstacles that oppose the united strength of Plantagenet and Stuart.
Welcome--thrice welcome to the Scottish land--kinsmen, nobles, valiant
gentlemen, bid dear welcome to my brother England!"




CHAPTER XXX

THE COURT OF SCOTLAND


     A lady, the wonder of her kind,
     Whose form was upborne by a lovely mind;
     Which dilating had moulded her mien and motion,
     Like a sea-flower unfolded beneath the ocean.

                                               SHELLEY.


A few days made it apparent that York acquired a stronger power over the
generous and amiable king of Scotland, than could be given by motives of
state policy. He became his friend; no empty name with James, whose
ardent soul poured itself headlong into this new channel, and revelled
in a kind of ecstasy in the virtues and accomplishments of his favoured
guest. Both these princes were magnanimous and honourable, full of
grandeur of purpose, and gentleness of manner; united by these main
qualities, the diversities of their dispositions served rather to draw
them closer. Though Richard's adventures and disasters had been so many,
his countenance, his very mind was less careworn than that of James. The
White Rose, even in adversity, was the nursling of love; the Scottish
prince, in his palace-fostered childhood, had been the object of his
father's hatred and suspicion: cabal, violence, and duplicity had waited
on him. James governed those around him by demonstrating to them, that
it was their interest to obey a watchful, loving, generous monarch:
Richard's power was addressed to the most exalted emotions of the human
heart, to the fidelity, self-devotion, and chivalric attachment of his
adherents. James drew towards himself the confidence of men; Richard
bestowed his own upon them. James was winning from his courtesy, Richard
from his ingenuousness. Remorse had printed a fadeless stamp of thought
and pain on the king's countenance; an internal self-communion and
self-rebuke were seated in the deep shadows of his thoughtful eyes.
Richard's sorrow for the disasters he might be said to have occasioned
his friends, his disdain of his own vagabond position, his sadness when
his winged thoughts flew after the Adalid, to hover over his sweet
Monina; all these emotions were tinged by respect for the virtues of
those around him, conscious rectitude, pious resignation to Providence,
gratitude to his friends, and a tender admiration of the virgin virtues
of her he loved: so that there arose thence only a softer expression for
his features, a sweetness in the candour of his smile, a gentle
fascination in his frank address, that gave at once the stamp of
elevated feeling and goodness to his mien. He looked innocent, while
James's aspect gave token, that in his heart good and ill had waged war:
the better side had conquered, yet had not come off scathless from the
fight.

In the first enthusiasm of his new attachment, James was eager to lavish
on his friend every mark of his favour and interest; he was obliged to
check his impatience, and to submit to the necessity of consulting with
and deferring to others. His promises, though large, continued therefore
to be vague; and York knew that he had several enemies at the
council-board. The intimacy between him and the king prevented him from
entertaining any doubts as to the result; but he had a difficult task in
communicating this spirit of patient forbearance to his friends.
Sometimes they took sudden fright, lest they should all at once meet a
denial to their desires; sometimes they were indignant at the delays
that were interposed. None was more open in his expressions of
discontent than Master Secretary Frion. He who had been the soul of
every enterprise until now, who had fancied that his talents for
negotiation would be of infinite avail in the Scottish court, found that
the friendship between the princes, and Richard's disdain of artfully
enticing to his side his host's noble subjects, destroyed at once his
diplomatic weaving. He craftily increased the discontent of the proud
Neville, the disquietude of the zealous Lady Brampton, and the turbulent
intolerance of repose of Lord Barry; while Richard, on the other hand,
exerted himself to tranquillize and reduce them to reason: he was
sanguine in his expectations, and above all, confident in his friend's
sincere intention to do more than merely assist him by force of arms. He
saw a thousand projects at work in James's generous heart, every one
tending to exalt him in the eyes of the world, and to rescue him for
ever from the nameless, fugitive position he occupied. Nor was his
constant intercourse with the king of small influence over his
happiness; the genius, the versatile talents, the grace and
accomplishments of this sovereign, the equality and sympathy that
reigned between them, was an exhaustless source of more than amusement,
of interest and delight. The friends of James became his friends: Sir
Patrick Hamilton was chief among these, and warmly attached to the
English prince: another, whom at first ceremony had placed at a greater
distance from him, grew into an object of intense interest and continual
excitation.

"This evening," said the king to him, soon after his arrival, "you will
see the flower of our Scottish damsels, the flower of the world well may
I call her; for assuredly, when you see the Lady Katherine Gordon, you
will allow that she is matchless among women."

Richard was surprised: did James's devotion to Lady Jane Kennedy, nay,
his conscious look whenever he mentioned her, mean nothing? Besides, on
this appeal to his own judgment, he pictured his soft-eyed Spaniard,
with all her vivacity and all her tenderness, and he revolted from the
idea of being the slave of any other beauty. "Speak to our guest, Sir
Patrick," continued the king, "and describe the fair earthly angel who
makes a heaven of our bleak wilds; or rather, for his highness might
suspect you, let me, not her lover, but her cousin, her admirer, her
friend, tell half the charms, half the virtues of the daughter of
Huntley. Is it not strange that I, who have seen her each day since
childhood, and who still gaze with wonder on her beauty, should yet find
that words fail me when I would paint it? I am apt to see, and ready to
praise, the delicate arch of this lady's brow, the fire of another's
eyes, another's pouting lip and fair complexion, the gay animation of
one, the chiselled symmetry of a second. Often, when our dear Lady Kate
has sat, as is often her wont, retired from sight, conversing with some
travelled greybeard, or paying the homage of attention to some ancient
dame (of late I have remarked her often in discourse with Lady
Brampton), I have studied her face and person to discover where the
overpowering charm exists, which, like a strain of impassioned music,
electrifies the senses, and touches the hearts of all near her. Is it in
her eyes? A poet might dream of dark blue orbs like hers, and that he
had kissed eyelids soft as those, when he came unawares on the repose of
young Aurora, and go mad for ever after, because it was only a dream:
yet I have seen brighter; nor are they languishing. Her lips, yes, the
soul of beauty is there, and so is it in her dimpled chin. In the
delicate rounding of her cheeks, and the swanlike loveliness of her
throat, in the soft ringlets of her glossy hair, down to the very tips
of her roseate-tinged fingers, there is proportion, expression, and
grace. You will hardly see all this: at first you will be struck;
extreme beauty must strike; but your second thought will be, to wonder
what struck you, and then you will look around, and see twenty prettier
and more attractive; and then, why, at the first words she speaks, you
will fancy it an easy thing to die upon the mere thought of her: her
voice alone will take you out of yourself, and carry you into another
state of being. She is simple as a child, straightforward, direct:
falsehood--pah! Katherine _is_ Truth. This simplicity, which knows
neither colouring nor deviation, might almost make you fear, while you
adore her, but that her goodness brings you back to love. She is good,
almost beyond the consciousness of being so: she is good because she
gives herself entirely up to sympathy; and, beyond every other, she
dives into the sources of your pleasures and pains, and takes a part in
them. The better part of yourself will, when she speaks, appear to leap
out, as if, for the first time, it found its other half; while the worse
is mute, like a stricken dog, before her. She is gay, more eager to
create pleasure than to please; for to please, we must think of
ourselves, and be ourselves the hero of the story, and Katherine is ever
forgetful of self: she is guileless and gall-less; all love her; her
proud father, and fiery, contentious Highland brothers, defer to her;
yet, to look at her, it is as if the youngest and most innocent of the
graces read a page of wisdom's book, scarce understanding what it meant,
but feeling that it was right."

It was dangerous to provoke the spirit of criticism by excessive praise;
Richard felt half inclined to assert that there was something in the
style of the king's painting that showed he should not like this lauded
lady; but she was his cousin, he was proud of her, and so he was silent.
There was a ball at court that night; and he would see many he had never
seen before; James made it a point that he should discover which was his
cousin. He could not mistake. "She is loveliness itself!" burst from his
lips; and from that moment he felt what James had said, that there was a
"music breathing from her face," an unearthly, spirit-stirring beauty,
that inspired awe, had not her perfect want of pretension, her quite,
unassuming simplicity, at once led him back to every thought associated
with the charms and virtues of woman. Lady Brampton was already a link
between them; and, in a few minutes, he found himself conversing with
more unreserve and pleasure than he had ever done. There are two
pleasures in our intercourse in society, one is to listen, another to
speak. We may frequently meet agreeable, entertaining people, and even
sometimes individuals, whose conversation, either by its wit, its
profundity, or its variety, commands our whole rapt attention: but very
seldom during the course of our lives do we meet those who thaw every
lingering particle of ice, who set the warm life-springs flowing, and
entice us, with our hearts upon our lips, to give utterance to its most
secret mysteries; to disentangle every knot and fold of thought, and,
like sea-weed in the wave, to spread the disregarded herbage, as a
tracery matchlessly fair before another's eyes. Such pleasure Richard
felt with Katherine; and, ever and anon, her melodious voice interposed
with some remark, some explanation of his own feelings, at once
brilliant and true.

Richard knew that Sir Patrick Hamilton loved the Lady Katherine Gordon;
he also was related to the royal family. Hamilton, in the eyes of all,
fair ladies and sage counsellors, was acknowledged to be the most
perfect knight of Scotland; what obstacle could there be to their union?
Probably it was already projected, and acceded to. Richard did not
derogate from the faith that he told himself he owed to Monina, by
cultivating a friendship for the promised bride of another, and moreover
one whom, after the interval of a few short months, he would never see
again. Satisfied with this reasoning, York lost no opportunity of
devoting himself to the Lady Katherine.

His interests were the continual subject of discussion in the royal
counsel-chamber. There were a few who did not speak in his favour. The
principal of these was the earl of Moray, the king's uncle: the least in
consideration, for he was not of the council, though he influenced it:
but the bitterest in feeling, was Sir John Ramsey, laird of Balmayne,
who styled himself Lord Bothwell. He had been a favourite of James the
Third. His dark, fierce temper was exasperated by his master's death,
and he brooded perpetually for revenge. He had once, with several other
nobles, entered into a conspiracy to deliver up the present king to
Henry the Seventh; and the traitorous intent was defeated, not from want
of will, but want of power in his abettors. Since then, Lord Bothwell,
though nominally banished and attainted, was suffered to live in
Edinburgh, nay, to have access to the royal person. James, whose
conscience suffered so dearly by the death of his father, had no desire
to display severity towards his ancient faithful servant; besides, one
who was really so insignificant as Sir John Ramsey. This man was
turbulent, dissatisfied: he was sold to Henry of England, and had long
acted as a spy; the appearance of York at Edinburgh gave activity and
importance to his function: his secret influence and covert intrigues
retarded somewhat the projects and desires of the king.

When the first opposition made to acknowledging this pretender to the
English crown was set aside, other difficulties ensued. Some of the
counsellors were for making hard conditions with the young duke, saying,
that half a kingdom were gift enough to a Prince Lackland: a golden
opportunity was this, they averred, to slice away a bonny county or two
from wide England; he whom they gifted with the rest could hardly say
them nay. But James was indignant at the base proposal, and felt
mortified and vexed when obliged to concede in part, and to make
conditions which he thought hard with his guest. After a noisy debate,
these propositions were drawn out, and York was invited to attend the
council, where they were submitted for his assent.

These conditions principally consisted in the surrender of Berwick, and
the promised payment of one hundred thousand marks. They were hard; for
it would touch the new monarch's honour not to dismember his kingdom;
and it were his policy not to burden himself with a debt which his
already, oppressed subjects must be drawn on to pay. The duke asked for
a day for consideration, which was readily granted.

With real zeal for his cause on one side, and perfect confidence in his
friends' integrity on the other, these difficulties became merely
nominal, and the treaty was speedily arranged. But the month of
September was near its close; a winter campaign would be of small avail:
money, arms, and trained men, were wanting. The winter was to be devoted
to preparation; with the spring the Scottish army was to pass the
English border. In every discussion, in every act, James acted as his
guest's brother, the sharer of his risks and fortunes: one will, one
desire, was theirs. Sir Patrick Hamilton went into the west to raise
levies: no, third person interposed between them. It was the king's
disposition to yield himself wholly up to the passion of the hour. He
saw in Richard, not only a prince deprived of his own, and driven into
exile, but a youth of royal lineage, exposed to the opprobium of
nicknames and the accusation of imposture. The king of France
acknowledged, but he had deserted him: the archduke had done the same:
how could James prove that he would not follow in these steps? He levied
the armies of his kingdom in his favour; he was to fight and conquer for
him next spring. The intervening months were intolerable to the fervent
spirit of the Stuart--something speedy, something now, he longed, he
resolved to do; which, with a trumpet-note, should to all corners of the
world declare, that he upheld Richard of York's right--that he was his
defender, his champion. Once he penned a universal challenge, then
another especially addressed to Henry Tudor; but his invasion were a
better mode than this. Should he give him rank in Scotland?--that would
ill beseem one who aspired to the English crown. Should he proclaim him
Richard the Fourth in Edinburgh?--York strongly objected to this.
Money?--it were a base gilding; besides, James was very poor, and had
melted down his plate, and put his jewels to pawn, to furnish forth the
intended expedition. Yet there was one way,--the idea was as
lightning--James felt satisfied and proud; and then devoted all his
sagacity, all his influence, all his ardent soul, to the accomplishment
of a plan, which, while it insured young Richard's happiness, stamped
him indelibly as being no vagabond impostor, but the honoured prince,
the kinsman and ally of Scotland's royal house.

King James and the duke of York had ridden out to inspect a Lowland
regiment, which the earl of Angus proudly displayed as the force of the
Douglas. As they returned, James was melancholy and meditative. "It is
strange and hard to endure," he said at last, fixing on his companion
his eyes at once so full of fire and thought, "when two spirits contend
within the little microcosm of man. I felt joy at sight of those bold
followers of the Douglas, to think that your enemy could not resist
them; but I do myself foolish service, when I place you on the English
throne. You will leave us, my lord: you will learn in your bonny realm
to despise our barren wilds: it will be irksome to you in prosperity, to
think of your friends of the dark hour."

There was sincerity in these expressions, but exaggeration in the
feelings that dictated them. Richard felt half-embarrassed, in spite of
gratitude and friendship. The king, following the bent of his own
thoughts, not those of others, suddenly continued: "Our cousin Kate at
last, finds grace in your eyes; is she not good and beautiful, all cold
and passionless as she is?"

"Cold!" the Lady Katherine, whose heartfelt sympathy, was a sunny clime
in which he basked--whose sensibility perpetually varied the bright
expression of her features--York repeated the word in astonishment.

"Thou findest her wax?" inquired James, smiling; "by my troth, she has
proved but marble before."

"I cannot guess even at your meaning," replied York, with all the warmth
of a champion; "the lady is in the estimation of all, in your own
account, the best daughter, the most devoted friend, the kindest
mistress in the world. How can we call that spirit cold, which animates
her to these acts? It is not easy to perform, as she does, our simplest
duties. How much of self-will, of engrossing humour, even of our
innocent desires and cherished tastes, must we not sacrifice, when we
devote ourselves to the pleasure and service of others? How much
attention does it not require, how sleepless a feeling of interest,
merely to perceive and understand the moods and wishes of those around
us! An inert, sluggish nature, half ice, half rock, cannot do this. To
achieve it, as methinks your fair kinswoman does, requires all her
understanding, all her sweetness, all that exquisite tact and
penetrative feeling I never saw but in her."

"I am glad you say this," said James. "Yes, Kate has a warm heart: none
has a better right to say so than I. There are--there were times, for
the gloom of the dark hour is somewhat mitigated--when no priest, no
penance, had such power over me as my cousin Katherine's sweet voice.
Like a witch she dived into the recesses of my heart, plucking thence my
unholy distrust in God's mercy. By St. Andrew! when I look at her, all
simple and gentle as she is, I wonder in what part of her resides the
wisdom and the eloquence I have heard fall from her lips; nor have I had
the heart to reprove her, when I have been angered to see our cousin Sir
Patrick driven mad by her sugared courtesies."

"Does she not affect Sir Patrick?" asked Richard, while he wondered at
the thrilling sensation of fear that accompanied his words.

"'Yea, heartily,' she will reply," replied the king; "'Would you have me
disdain our kinsman?' she asks when I rail; but you, who are of gender
masculine, though, by the mass! a smooth specimen of our rough kind,
know full well that pride and impertinence are better than equable,
smiling, impenetrable sweetness. Did the lady of my love treat me thus,
'sdeath, I think I should order myself the rack for pastime. But we
forget ourselves; push on, dear prince. It is the hour, when the hawks
and their fair mistresses are to meet us on the hill's side. I serve no
such glassy damsel; nor would I that little Kennedy's eye darted fires
on me in scorn of ray delay. Are not my pretty Lady Jane's eyes bright,
Sir Duke?"

"As a fire-fly among dark-leaved myrtles."

"Or a dew-drop on the heather, when the morning sun glances on it, as we
take our mountain morning-way to the chase. You look grave, my friend;
surely her eyes are nought save as nature's miracle to you?"

"Assuredly not," replied York; "are they other to your majesty--you do
not love the lady?"

"Oh, no!" reiterated James, with a meaning glance, "I do not love the
Lady Jane; only I would bathe in fire, bask in ice, do each and every
impossibility woman's caprice could frame for trials to gain--but I
talk wildly to a youthful sage. Say, most revered anchorite, wherefore
doubt you my love to my pretty mistress?"

"Love!" exclaimed Richard; his eyes grew lustrous in their own soft dew
as he spoke. "Oh, what profanation is this! And this you think is love!
to select a young, innocent, and beauteous girl--who, did she wed her
equal, would become an honoured wife and happy mother--to select her,
the more entirely to deprive her of these blessings--to bar her out for
ever from a woman's paradise, a happy home; you, who even now are in
treaty for a princess-bride, would entice this young thing to give up
her heart, her all, into your hands, who will crush it, as boys a gaudy
butterfly, when the chase is over. Dear my lord, spare her the
pain--yourself remorse; you are too good, too wise, too generous, to
commit this deed and not to suffer bitterly."

A cloud came over James's features. The very word "remorse" was a sound
of terror to him. He smote his right hand against his side, where dwelt
his heart, in sore neighbourhood to the iron of his penance.

At this moment, sweeping down the near hill-side, came a gallant array
of ladies and courtiers. The king even lagged behind; when near, he
accosted Katherine, he spoke to the earl of Angus, to Mary Boyd, to all
save the Lady Jane, who first looked disdainful, then hurt, and, at
last, unable to straggle with her pain, rode sorrowfully apart. James
tried to see, to feel nothing. Her pride he resisted, her anger he
strove to contemn, her dejection he could not endure: and, when riding
up to her unaware, he saw the traces of tears on her cheek, usually so
sunny bright with smiles, he forgot everything save his wish to console,
to mollify, to cheer her. As they returned, his hand was on her
saddle-bow, his head bent down, his eyes looking into hers, and she was
smiling, though less gay than usual. From that hour James less coveted
the prince's society. He began a little to fear him: not the less did he
love and esteem him; and more, far more, did he deem him worthy of the
honour, the happiness he intended to bestow upon him.




CHAPTER XXXI

THE MARRIAGE


                 She is mine own;
     And I as rich in having such a jewel,
     As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,
     Their water nectar, and the rocks pure gold.

                                             SHAKSPEARE.


The threads were spun, warp and woof laid on, and Fate busily took up
the shuttle, which was to entwine the histories of two beings, at whose
birth pomp and royalty stood sponsors, whose career was marked by every
circumstance that least accorded with such a nativity. A thousand
obstacles stood in the way; the king, with all his fervour, hesitated
before he proposed to the earl of Huntley to bestow his daughter, of
whom he was justly proud, on a fugitive sovereign, without a kingdom,
almost without a name. Fortune, superstition, ten thousand of those
imperceptible threads which fate uses when she weaves her most
indissoluble webs, all served to bring about the apparently impossible.

The earl of Huntley was a man of a plain, straightforward, resolved
ambition. His head was warm, his heart cold, his purpose one--to
advance his house, and himself at the head of it, to as high a situation
as the position of subject would permit. In the rebellion which
occasioned the death of James the Third, he had vacillated, unable quite
to ascertain which party would prove triumphant; and when the rebels,
rebels then no more, but lieges to James the Fourth, won the day, they
looked coldly on their lukewarm partizan. Huntley grew discontented:
though still permitted to hold the baton of Earl Marshal, he saw a cloud
of royal disfavour darkening his fortunes; in high indignation he joined
in the nefarious plot of Buchan, Bothwell; and Sir Thomas Todd, to
deliver his sovereign into the hands of Henry of England, a project
afterwards abandoned.

Time had softened the bitter animosities which attended James at the
beginning of his reign. He extended his favour to all parties, and
reconciled them to each other. A wonder it was, to see the Douglases,
Hamiltons, Gordons, Homes, the Murrays, and Lennoxes, and a thousand
others, at peace with each other, and obedient to their sovereign. The
earl of Huntley, a man advanced in life, prudent, resolute, and politic,
grew into favour. He was among the principal of the Scottish peers; he
had sons, to whom the honours of his race would descend, and this one
daughter, whom he loved as well as he could love anything, and respected
from the extent of her influence, and the perfect prudence of her
conduct; she was his friend and counsellor, the mediator between him and
her brothers; the kind mistress to his vassals, a gentle, but
all-powerful link between him and his king, whose value he duly
appreciated.

Her marriage was often the subject of his meditation. Superstition was
ever rife in Scotland. James the Third had driven all his brothers from
him, because he had been told to beware of one near of kin; and his
death, of which his sou was the ostensible agent, fulfilled the
prophecy. Second-sight, in the Highlands, was of more avail than the
predictions of a Lowland sibyl. The seer of the house of Gordon had, on
the day of her birth, seen the Lady Katherine receive homage as a queen,
and standing at the altar with one, on whose young brow he perceived,
all dim and shadowy, "the likeness of a kingly crown." True, this
elevation was succeeded by disasters: he had beheld her a fugitive; he
saw her stand on the brow of a cliff that overlooked the sea, while the
wild clouds careered over the pale moon, alone, deserted; he saw her a
prisoner; he saw her stand desolate beside the corpse of him she had
wedded--the diadem was still there, dimly seen amid the disarray of his
golden curls. These images haunted the earl's imagination, and made him
turn a slighting ear to Sir Patrick Hamilton, and other noble suitors of
his lovely child. Sometimes he thought of the king, her cousin, or one
of his brothers: flight, desolation, and death, were no strange
attendants on the state of the king of Scotland, and these miseries he
regarded as necessary and predestined; he could not avert, and so he
hardly regarded them, while his proud bosom swelled at the anticipation
of the thorny diadem, which was to press the brow of a daughter of the
Gordon.

Lord Huntley had looked coldly on the English prince. Lord Bothwell, as
he called himself, otherwise Sir John Ramsay, of Balmayne, his former
accomplice, tampered with him on the part of Henry the Seventh, to
induce him to oppose warmly the reception of this "feigned boy," and to
negative every proposition to advance his claims. King Henry's urgent
letters, and Ramsay's zeal, awakened the earl's suspicions; a manifest
impostor could hardly engender such fears, such hate; and, when midnight
assassination, or the poisoned bowl, were plainly hinted at by the
monarch of wide England, Huntley felt assured that the enemy he so
bitterly pursued was no pretender, but the rightful heir of the sceptre
Henry held. He did not quite refuse to join with Bothwell, especially
when he heard that he was listened to by the bishop of Moray and the
earl of Buchan; but involuntarily he assumed a different language with
regard to York, became more respectful to him, and by his demeanour
crushed at once the little party who had hitherto spoken of him with
contempt. The king perceived this change; it was the foundation-stone of
his project. "Tell me, you who are wise, my lord," said the monarch to
his earl marshal, "how I may raise our English prince in the eyes of
Scotland. We fight for him in the spring--for him, we say--but few of
ours echo the word; they disdain to fight for any not akin to them."

"They would fight for the Foul Fiend," said Huntley, "whom they would be
ill-pleased to call cousin, if he led them over the English border."

"Ay, if he took them there to foray; but the duke of York will look on
England as his own, and when the nobles of the land gather round him, it
will be chauncy work to keep them and our Scots from shedding each
other's blood; they would spill Duke Richard's like water, if no drop of
it can be deemed Scotch."

"It were giving him a new father and mother," replied the earl, "to call
him thus."

"When two even of hostile houses intermarry, our heralds pale their
arms; the offspring pale their blood."

"But what Scottish lady would your grace bestow on him whose rank were a
match for royalty? There is no princess of the Stuarts."

"And were there," asked James, quickly, "would it beseem us to bestow
our sister on a King Lackland?"

"Or would your majesty wait till he were king of England, when France,
Burgundy, and Spain would compete with you? I do believe that this noble
gentleman has fair right to his father's crown; he is gallant and
generous, so is not King Henry; he is made to be the idol of a warlike
people, such as the English, so is not his rival. Do you strike one
stroke, the whole realm rises for him, and he becomes its sovereign:
then it were a pride and a glory for us, for him a tie to bind him for
ever, did he place his diadem on the head of a Scottish damsel."

"You are sanguine and speak warmly," replied the king: "see you beyond
your own words? to me they suggest a thought which I entertain, or not,
as is your pleasure: there is but one lady in our kingdom fitting mate
for him, and she is more Gordon than Stuart. Did your lordship glance at
the Lady Katherine in your speech?"

Lord Huntley changed colour: a sudden rush of thought palsied the
beatings of his heart. Was he called upon to give his child, his
throne-destined daughter, to this king-errant? Nay, nay, thus did
fortune blindly work; her hand would insure to him the crown, and so
fulfil to her the dark meaning of the seer: hesitating, lost to his
wonted presence of mind, Huntley could only find words to ask for a day
for reflection. James wondered at this show of emotion; he could not
read its full meaning: "At your pleasure, my lord," he said, "but if you
decide against my honoured, royal friend, remember that this question
dies without record--you will preserve our secret."

Every reflection that could most disquiet an ambitious man possessed the
earl marshal. That his daughter should be queen of England was beyond
his hopes; that she should be the errant wife of a pretender, who passed
his life in seeking ineffectual aid at foreign courts, was far beneath
them. He canvassed every likelihood of York's success; now they dwindled
like summer-snow on the southern mountain's side--now they strode high
and triumphant over every obstacle; the clinging feeling was--destiny
had decreed it--she being his wife, both would succeed and reign.
"There is fate in it," was his last reflection, "and I will not gainsay
the fulfilment. Andrew of the Shawe was the prince of seers, as I have
good proof. Still to a monarch alone shall she give her hand, and I must
make one condition."

This one condition Lord Huntley communicated to his royal master. It was
that York should, as of right he might, assume the style and title of
king. James smiled at his earl marshal's childish love of gauds, and did
not doubt that the duke would pay so easy price for a jewel invaluable
as Katherine. But granting this, the king, knowing the noble's despotic
character, required one condition also on his part, that he should first
announce the intended union to the lady, and that it should not have
place without her free and entire consent. Huntley was surprised:
"Surely, my liege," he began, "if your majesty and I command----"

"Our sweet Kate will obey," interrupted James; "but this is no mere
marriage of policy; hazards, fearful hazards may attend it. Did I not
believe that all would end well, by the Holy Rood he should not have
her; but she may see things with different eyes--she may shrink from
becoming the wife of an exile, a wanderer without a home: yet that need
never be."

York little guessed the projects of his royal friend. Love, in its most
subtle guise, had insinuated itself into his soul, becoming a very
portion of himself. That part of our nature, which to our reflections
appears the most human, and yet which forms the best part of humanity,
is our desire of sympathy; the intense essence of sympathy is love. Love
has been called selfish, engrossing, tyrannic--as the root, so the
green leaf that shoots from it--love is a part of us--it is our
manifestation of life; and poisonous or sweet will be the foliage,
according to the stock. When we love, it is our aim and conclusion to
make the object a part of ourselves--if we are self-willed and evilly
inclined, little good can arise; but deep is the fount of generous,
devoted, godlike feeling, which this silver key unlocks in gentle
hearts. Richard had found in the Lady Katherine a magic mirror, which
gave him back himself, arrayed with a thousand alien virtues; his soul
was in her hands, plastic to her fairy touch, and tenderness and worship
and wonder took his heart, ere passion woke, and threw a chain over
these bosom guests, so that they could never depart. A mild, yet golden
light dawned upon his soul, and beamed from it, lighting up creation
with splendour--filling his mind with mute, yet entrancing melody. He
walked in a dream; but far from being rendered by his abstraction morose
or inattentive to others, never had he been so gay, never so considerate
and amiable. He felt that, beneath the surface of his life, there was
the calm and even the bliss of Paradise; and his lightest word or act
must be, by its grace and benevolence, in concord with the tranquil
spirit that brooded over his deeper-hidden self. All loved him the
better for the change, save Frion; there was something in him that the
wily Frenchman did not understand; he went about and about, but how
could this man of "low-thoughted care" understand the holy mysteries of
love.

Katherine accompanied her father to Gordon Castle, in Aberdeenshire.
Where was the light now, that had made a summer noon in Richard's soul?
There was memory: it brought before him her cherub-face, her voice, the
hours when at her side he had poured out his overbrimming soul in
talk--not of love, but of ideas, feelings, imaginations he had never
spoken before. Two days passed, and by that time he had collected a
whole volume of things he wished to say--and she was far: then hope
claimed entrance to his heart, and with her came a train he dreamt not
of--of fears, anticipations, terror, despair; and then a tenfold ardour
for his enterprise. Should he not win Katherine and a kingdom?

On the third day after her departure, King James informed the prince,
that Lord Huntley had invited them to visit him at his castle, "Will
your grace venture," he asked, "so far into the frozen circles of the
icy north? You will traverse many a savage defile and wild mountain-top;
torrents and dark pine forests bar the way, and barrenness spreads her
hag's arms to scare the intruder. I speak your language, the effeminate
language of an Andalusian, who loves the craggy heights, only when
summer basks upon them; and the deep sunless dell, when myrtles and
geranium impregnate the air with sweets. I love the mist and snow, the
tameless winds and howling torrent, the bleak unadorned precipice, the
giant pines where the north makes music. The grassy upland and the
corn-field, these belong to man, and to her they call Nature, the fair,
gaudy dame; but God takes to himself, and lives among these sublime
rocks, where power, majesty and eternity are shaped forth, and the
grandeur of heaven-piercing cliffs allies us to a simple but elevating
image of the Creator."

King James was a poet, and could feel thus--York might smile at his
enthusiasm for the bleak and horrific. But had the path to Gordon Castle
been ten times more frightful, the thoughts of love were roses, the
hopes of love vernal breezes, to adorn it with beauty. "Say, my lord,"
continued James, "shall we go throwing aside the cumbrous burthen of
pomp? We are here in Perth. Yonder, over those peaks, lies our direct
path. Shall we, two woodland rovers, with bows in our hand and quivers
at our back, take our solitary way through the wild region? It is my
pastime ofttimes so to do; and well I know the path that leads me to the
abode of my cousin Kate. We will send our attendants by the easier path
to the eastern sea-shore, at once to announce our approach, and bear
such gear as we may need, not to play too humble a part in Huntley's
eyes."

A thousand motives of policy and pride had induced the earl to desire
that this marriage should be celebrated in the Highlands. Here he would
appear almost a sovereign to his royal son-in-law; here also he should
avoid the sarcasms of the Tudor party, and the anger of those who had
pretended to fair Katherine's hand. James consented to his wish, and now
led his friend and guest, through the very heart of his craggy kingdom
over the Grampians, towards Aberdeen. It was the end of October; a few
sweet autumnal days still lingered among these northern hills, as if to
light on their way the last feathered migrators hastening towards the
south; but dark mists invested their morning progress. The rivers were
swollen; and the mountain peaks often saluted the rising sun, garmented
in radiant snow. It was a little drear, yet grand, sublime, wondrous.
York suppressed his chilling distaste, till it grew into admiration; the
king played the guide featly; and the honoured name of the Bruce, which
peopled this region with proud memories, was the burthen of many a tale;
nor was his account of the fierce people of these wilds unwelcome to a
warrior. York remarked that the king was generally known to them, not,
indeed, as a monarch, but as a hunter, a traveller, sometimes as a
skilful mediciner, or as a bard, and always hospitably received.

After three days they drew near their journey's end: curiosity as to the
cause of their visit, anxiety concerning his reception, all faded in
Richard's heart; dimmed by the glad expectation of seeing her again, who
had dawned the glowing orient of his darkened heart. They had departed
from their rude shelter before the sun rose: the mountain peaks were
awake with day, while night still slumbered in the plain below: some
natural sights speak to the heart more than others, wherefore we know
not: the most eloquent is that of the birth of day on the untrodden
hill-tops, while we, who behold it, are encompassed by shadows. York
paused: the scene appeared to close in on him, and to fill him, even to
overflowing, with its imagery. They were toiling up the mountain's side:
below, above, the dark pines, in many a tortuous shape, clung to the
rifted rocks; the fern clustered round some solitary old oak; while,
beetling over, were dark frowning crags, or the foldings of the
mountains, softened into upland, painted by the many coloured heather.
With the steady pace of a mountaineer, King James breasted the
hill-side; nor did York bely his rugged Spanish home. As a bravado, the
king, in the very sheer ascent, trolled a ballad, a wild Scottish song,
and Richard answered by a few notes of a Moorish air. A voice seemed to
answer him, not an echo, for it was not his own, but taking the
thrilling sweetness of Monina's tones. Ah! ungentle waves, and untaught
winds, whither bear ye now the soft nursling of Andalusia? Such a
thought darkened York's brow; when the king, pausing in his toil, leaned
against a jutting crag--both young, both gallant, both so noble and so
beautiful; of what could they think--of what speak? Not of the
well-governed realm of the one, nor the yet unconquered kingdom of the
other; of such they might have spoken among statesmen and warriors, in
palaces or on the battle plain; but here, in this wild solitude, the
vast theatre whose shifting scenes and splendid decorations were the
clouds, the mountain, the forest, and the wave, where man stood, not as
one of the links of society, forced by his relative position to consider
his station and his rank, but as a human being, animated only by such
emotions as were the growth of his own nature--of what should they
speak--the young, the beautiful--but love!

"Tell me, gentle cavalier," cried James, suddenly; "hast thou ever been
in love? Now would I give my jewel-hilted dagger to tear thy secret from
thee," continued the king, laughing; for York's eyes had flashed with
sudden light, and then fell downcast. Where were his thoughts? at his
journey's goal, or on the ocean sea? If he smiled, it was for Kate; but
the tear that glittered on his long eyelashes, spoke of his Spanish
maid. Yet it was not the passion of love that he now felt for his
childhood companion; it was tenderness, a brother's care, a friend's
watchfulness, all that man can feel for woman, unblended with the desire
of making her his; but gratitude and distance had so blended and mingled
his emotions, that, thus addressed, he almost felt as if he had been
detected in a crime.

"Now, by the Holy Rood, thou blushest," said James, much amused; "not
more deeply was fair Katherine's cheek bedyed, when I put the self-same
question to her. Does your grace guess, wherefore we journey
northwards?"

Richard turned an inquiring and unquiet look upon his royal companion. A
kind of doubt was communicated to James's mind; he knew little of his
friend's former life: was it not possible that engagements were already
formed, incompatible with his plans? With some haughtiness, for his
impetuous spirit ill brooked the slightest check, he disclosed the
object of their visit to Castle Gordon, and the proposal he had made to
the earl to unite him in marriage to the Scottish princess.

"When I shall possess my kingdom--when I may name my wife, that which
she is, or nothing--queen!" Richard exclaimed.

"Nay, I speak of no millenium, but of the present hour," said James.

The enthusiastic king, bent upon his purpose, went on to speak of all
the advantages that would result from this union. York's silence nettled
him: the prince's thoughts were, indeed, opposed to the exultation and
delight which his friend had expected to see painted on his face. The
first glad thought of a lover is to protect and exalt her he loves.
Katherine was a princess in her native land;--and what was he?--an
outcast and a beggar--a vagabond upon the earth--a man allied to all
that was magnificent in hope--to all that imagination could paint of
gallant and true in himself, and devoted and noble in his friends. But
these were idealities to the vulgar eye; and he had only a title as
unreal as these, and a mere shadowy right, to bestow. It had been sinful
even to ally Monina to his broken fortunes; but this high offspring of a
palace--the very offer, generous as it was, humbled him. A few minutes'
silence intervened; and, in a colder tone James was about to address
him, when York gave words to all the conflicting emotions in his
breast--speaking such gratitude, love, hope, and despair, as reassured
his friend, and made him the more resolved to conquer the difficulties
unexpectedly given birth to by the disinterestedness of his guest.

A contest ensued; Richard deprecating the rich gift offered to him--the
king warmly asserting that he must accept it. The words vagabond and
outcast were treason to his friendship: if, which was impossible, they
did not succeed in enforcing the rights to his ancestral kingdom, was
not Scotland his home--for ever his home--if he married Katherine? And
the monarch went on to describe the happiness of their future lives--a
trio bound by the ties of kindred--by affection--by the virtues, nay,
even by the faults of each. He spoke also of the disturbances that so
often had wrecked the fortunes of the proudest Scottish nobles, and
said, that a princess of that land, united, it might be, to one of its
chiefs, trimmed her bark for no summer sea. "Like these wild Highlands
are our storm-nursed lives," continued James. "By our ruder thanes the
beautiful and weak are not respected; and tempest and ruin visit ever
the topmost places. Kate is familiar to such fears, or rather to the
resignation and courage such prospects may inspire. Look around on these
crags! listen! the storm is rising on the hills--howling among the
pines. Such has been my cousin's nursery--such the school which has
made her no slave of luxury; no frail floweret, to be scared when the
rough wind visits her cheek."

In such discussions the travellers beguiled the time. The day was
stormy; but, eager to arrive, they did not heed its pelting. York had a
sun in his own heart, that beamed on him in spite of the clouds
overhead. Notwithstanding his first keen emotion of pain at the idea of
linking one so lovely to his dark fate, the entrancing thought of
possessing Katherine--that she had already consented to be
his--animated him with delight, vague indeed; for yet he struggled
against the flattering illusion.

After battling the whole day against a succession of steep acclivities,
as evening drew near, the friends gained the last hill-top, and stood on
its brow, overlooking a fertile plain or strath--an island of verdure
amidst the black, precipitous mountains that girded it. The sun was
hidden by the western mountains, which cast their shadow into the
valley; but the clouds were dispersed, and the round full silvery moon
was pacing up the eastern heaven. The plain at their feet was studded by
villages, adorned by groves, and threaded by two rivers, whose high,
romantic banks varied the scene. An extensive, strongly-built castle
stood on the hill that overhung one of the streams, looking proudly down
on this strath, which contained nearly thirty-six square miles of
fertile ground. "Behold," said James, "the kingdom of Lord Huntley,
where he is far more absolute than I in my bonny Edinburgh. The Gordon
fought for the Bruce; and the monarch bestowed on him this fair, wide
plain as his reward. Bruce flying before his enemies, on foot, almost
alone, among these savage Grampians, then looked upon it as now we do."

King James's thoughts were full of that wild exhilaration of spirit,
which none, save the inhabitant of a mountainous country, knows, when
desolation is around--a desolation which is to him the pledge of
freedom and of power. But York had other ideas: he had been told that
the Lady Katherine had yielded a willing consent to the proposal made;
and she whom he had before conversed with only as a gentle friend--she,
the lovely and the good--his young heart beat thick,--it had no
imagery, far less words, expressive of the rapture of love, tortured by
the belief that such a prize he ought to--he must--resign.

The petty tyranny of trivial circumstance often has more power over our
best-judged designs, than our pride permits us to confess. From the
moment York entered Castle Gordon, he found an almost invisible, but
all-conquering net thrown over him. The Gordon, for thus the earl of
Huntley preferred being called, when surrounded by his clan in his
northern fastness, received the princes with barbaric, but extreme
magnificence: his dress was resplendent; his followers numerous, and
richly clad according to Highland ideas of pomp. But no Lady Katherine
was there, and it soon became apparent that Richard was first to see her
at the altar. Sounds of nuptial festivity rang through the castle;
instead of grace or generosity attending his meditated declining of the
honour, it would have borne the guise of an arrogant refusal. There was
also something in the savage look of the clansmen, in the rude
uncivilization of her native halls, where defence and attack formed the
creed and practice of all, that reconciled him to the idea of leading
her from the wild north to softer, milder scenes; where every disaster
wears a gentler shape; soothed, not exasperated by the ministrations of
nature.

At midnight, but a very few hours after his arrival, he stood, beside
her in the chapel to interchange their vows. The earl had decorated the
holy place with every emblem that spoke of his own greatness, and that
of his son-in-law. The style of royalty was applied to him, and the
ambitious noble, "overleaping" himself, grasped with childish or savage
impetuosity at the shadowy sceptre, and obscure cloud-wrapt crown of the
royal exile. York, when he saw the princess, summoned all his
discernment to read content or dissatisfaction in her eyes; if any of
the latter should appear, even there he would renounce his hopes. All
was calm, celestially serene. Nay, something almost of exultation
struggled through the placid expression of her features, as she cast her
eyes up to heaven, till modest gentleness veiled them again, and they
were bent to earth.

The generosity and pride of woman had kindled these sentiments. The Lady
Katherine, a princess by birth, would scarcely have dreamed of resisting
her father's behests, even if they had been in opposition to her
desires; but here she was to sacrifice no inclination, nothing but
prosperity; that must depart for ever, she felt she knew, when she
became the bride of England's outcast prince. Yet should aught of good
and great cling to him, it was her gift; and to bestow was the passion
of her guileless heart. It was not reason; it was feeling, perhaps
superstition, that inspired these ideas. The seer who foretold her
fortunes, had been her tutor and her poet; she believed in him, and
believed that all would be accomplished; even to the death of the
beautiful and beloved being who stood in the pride and strength of youth
at her side. All must be endured; for it was the will of Heaven.
Meanwhile, that he should be happy during his mortal career was to be
her study, her gift, the aim of her life. In consenting to be his, she
also had made a condition, that, if defeat awaited his arms, and that
again a wanderer he was obliged to fly before his enemies, she was not
to be divided from him; if no longer here, she was to be permitted to
join him; if he departed, she should accompany him.

As the priest bestowed his benediction on the illustrious and beauteous
pair, a silent vow was formed in the heart of either. Doomed by his
ill-fate to hardship and dependence, he would find in her a medicine for
all his woes, a wife, even the better, purer part of himself, who would
never suffer him to despair; but who would take the bitterer portion of
his sorrow on herself, giving in return the heroism, the piety, the
serene content which was the essence of her being. His vow, it depended
not on himself, poor fellow! "Never through me shall she suffer," was
the fervent resolve. Alas! as if weak mortal hands could hold back giant
Calamity, when he seizes the heart, and rends it at his pleasure.




CHAPTER XXXII

THE MARCH TOWARDS ENGLAND


     But these are chimes for funerals: my business
     Attends on fortune of a sprightlier triumph;
     For love and majesty are reconciled,
     And vow to crown thee Empress of the West.

                                            FORD.


The royal party returned to Edinburgh, where the nuptials of Richard of
England and the Lady Katherine were celebrated with splendour.
Festivities of all kinds, tournaments, hunting parties, balls, succeeded
to each other; but far beyond every outward demonstration was the real
happiness insured by this marriage. Graced by Katherine, the little
English court became a paradise. The princess assumed her new character
among the exiles with facility; yet the phrase is bad, for Katherine
could assume nothing, not even a virtue, if she had it not. In every
position she was not princess, queen, patroness, or mistress; but woman
merely--a true-hearted, gentle, refined woman. She was too young for
the maternal character to be appropriate to her, yet the watchfulness
and care she had for all resembled it. Her new subjects felt as if
before they had been a disconnected, vagabond troop, and that dignity
and station were assigned to them through her; through her the charities
and elegances of life hallowed and adorned them. The quality most
peculiarly her own was the divine simplicity which animated her look,
her manners, her acts. Taintless simplicity, that best of fascinations,
whose power is not imperious and sudden, but gradual and changeless,
where every word spoken is but the genuine interpreter of the feelings
of the heart, to which not only falsehood, but even the slightest
disguise or affectation, is wholly foreign; and which is the more
delicate, winning and kind, from being spontaneous--so that, as in
describing her, her royal cousin had said, "you almost questioned her
authority from its want of pretension, yet yielded to it in all its
extent."

Richard's political position stood higher than ever. The ever-watchful
duchess of Burgundy had sent a renowned Burgundian captain, Sir
Roderick-de-Lalayne, with two hundred German mercenaries. The king of
France, at the request of Henry the Seventh, had despatched an embassy
to King James, to advise a peace between England and Scotland. The
ambassador was the Sire de Concressault, York's ancient friend, who
continued to espouse his cause warmly, and gave it all the grace and
honour of his high influence. King James was eager to collect his army,
and to prepare for an invasion. If Richard had lost any part of his
open-hearted confidence and personal friendship, he had gained in his
esteem and consideration. The change that had been operating was
imperceptible to York, who naturally found in his marriage a barrier to
the hourly intercourse they had formerly had, when both were free. Yet
change there was, greater even than the king himself suspected; the
causes were easily traced.

The Tudor party in Scotland, instigated by bribes and large promises,
were very active in their enmity to the White Rose. They had been obliged
to let the torrent of royal favour force its headlong way, but they
watched the slightest pause in its flow, to throw impediments in the way
of the abundant stream. Soon after his return from the North, it became
apparent that the king continued no unsuccessful suitor to the Lady Jane
Kennedy. This a good deal estranged him from his English friend, who no
longer reproved, but whose tacit condemnation he feared, as well as that
of his fair cousin. Nay, more, Lady Jane had drawn from him the cause of
their transient quarrel, and, now that she had yielded, felt angry and
disdainful at the attempt made to estrange her lover. One of those lower
eddies or currents of intelligence, so in use at courts, had reported an
angry expression of hers to the earl of Buchan, one of York's most
active enemies. This grasping-place in their difficult way was eagerly
laid hold of by the conspirators. A coalition was formed between Lady
Jane and this party, which insured the aggravation of any ill-feeling
that might arise between the late brothers in heart. Soon after another
agent or tool was added to their number.

The most subtle, the most politic, the most wily, are sometimes the
slaves of impulse; nay, very often those who fancy that they measure
their actions the most narrowly by the rules, either of self-interest or
ambition, are more easily influenced to unwise passion by any obstacle
thrown in their path. The Secretary Frion had hitherto considered
himself of primal import to the English prince: no project was
conceived, that was not first concocted in his brain, and insinuated by
him; every new partizan had been enticed by his silvery speeches;
whatever of difficult, crooked, and hidden was to be done, Frion was
consulted, and employed, and deeply trusted in its accomplishment. On
his first arrival in Scotland, the intimacy between the king and York
destroyed half his influence. James's discernment and experience was not
duped by the insinuating flatteries of Frion: as a proud man he
disdained, as a conscientious and pious one, he disliked him. It was
worse when Katherine's influence became paramount; she put him exactly
in his right place, yet was so kind that there was no room for
complaint: all his former patrons were her worshippers; her praises were
re-echoed from all; and assuredly no intrigue could exist where she was.
Yet it was neither comprehensible, nor to be endured, that this banished
prince and his friends should walk straight forward in their allotted
route, unaided by plot or manœuvre. The subtlety of the man quickly
revealed to him the existence of the opposing party; he was ready to
foment it, were it only to gain reputation afterwards by its
destruction. He made one step, and became the confidant of Balmayne, and
apparently the tool of the higher confederates: at first he rather
perplexed than served them, spinning spiders' webs in their way, and
elevating himself in their eyes by brushing them off at his pleasure. He
was exactly the man to shine in a dark conspiracy: soon nothing could be
done but by his advice, nothing known but as he informed them, nothing
said but as he dictated. Balmayne, who, fierce and moody, entered more
zealously into these discontents than any other, yet took his
counsel--little knew they Maître Etienne Frion: he only watched the
while, sage fisher of men as he was, for the best opportunity of
betraying them for his own advantage. In the midst of festivity, of
gallant, warlike preparation, Frion had, like a witch gathering
poisonous herbs by the silvery light of the quiet moon, sought to
extract all that was baleful in what, but for the uses to which he
strove to put it, had died innocuous.

The winter grew into spring: these were the happiest months of young
Richard's life. He had traversed many a pass of danger and tract of
sorrow--falsehood had blotted--loss of friends, who had died for him,
had darkened the past years: often during their course he had believed
that he gave himself up to despair; he had fancied that he had doubted
every one and every thing; he imagined that he was tired of
existence--vain ideas! Sanguine, confiding, full to the very brim of
that spirit of life which is the happiness of the young, he sprang up a
fresh Antæus, each time that Fortune with Herculean power had thrown
him to the earth. And now he congratulated himself even on every misery,
every reverse, every sentiment of despondency that he experienced: they
were so many links of the chain that made him what he was--the friend
of James, the husband of Katherine. It was this best attribute of
sunny-hearted youth, this greenness of the soul, that made Richard so
frank, so noble, so generous; care and time had laboured in vain--no
wrinkle, no deforming line marked his mind, or, that mind's interpreter,
his open, candid brow.

With the spring the Scottish troops drew together, and encamped near
Edinburgh. The occasion seemed seasonable; for news arrived of
disturbances which had taken place in England, and which had caused
Henry the Seventh to recall the earl of Surrey (who was conducting an
army northward to oppose the expected attack from Scotland), to check
and defeat enemies which had arisen in the west of his kingdom. The
inhabitants of Cornwall, vexed by increasing taxes, had long been in a
state of turbulence; and now, instigated by two ringleaders from among
themselves, combined together, and rose in open and regulated
rebellion--sedition, it might have been called; and had perhaps been
easily crushed, but for the interference of one, who acted from designs
and views which at first had made no part of the projects of the
insurgents.

Lord Audley had not forgotten the White Rose. On his return westward,
however, he found all so quiet, that no effort of his could rouse the
rich and satisfied men of Devon, from their inglorious repose. His
imprudence attracted attention; he had notice of the danger of an
arrest, and suddenly resolved to quit the post he had chosen, and to
join the duke of York in Ireland. He came too late; the English squadron
had sailed; and he, changeful as the winds and as impetuous, despising a
danger now remote, resolved to return to England, and to Devonshire. His
voyage from Cork to Bristol was sufficiently disastrous; contrary and
violent winds drove him from his course into the Atlantic; here he beat
about for several days, till the wind, shifting a point or two to the
west, he began to make what sail he could in the opposite direction.
Still the weather was tempestuous, and his skiff laboured frightfully
amidst the stormy waves; not far from them, during the greatest fury of
the gale, was a larger vessel, if such might be called the helmless,
dismasted hull, tossed by the billows, the sport of the winds, as it
rose and fell in the trough of the sea. At length the wind lulled; and
the captain of the caravel, which indeed might be called a wreck,
lowered a boat, and came alongside Lord Audley's vessel, asking whither
he was bound? To England, was the answer; and the vast reef of clouds
lifted on the southern horizon, and showing beyond a streak of azure,
gave promise of success in their voyage. The questioner, who spoke
English imperfectly, went on to say, that in spite of the miserable
state of the caravel, he was resolved not to desert her, but to carry
her, God willing, into the nearest French port he could make. But there
was on board one sick, a woman, whom he wished to spare the dangers and
privations of the voyage. Would the commander take her to England, and
bestow her in some convent, where she might be tended and kept in
honourable safety? Lord Audley gave a willing consent, and the boat went
off speedily, returning again with their stranger passenger. She was in
the extremity of illness, even of danger, and lay, like a child, in the
arms of the dark, tall, weather-beaten mariner, who, though squalid in
his appearance from fatigue and want, stood as a rock that has braved a
thousand storms; his muscles seemed iron--his countenance not stern,
but calm and resolved--yet tenderness and softness were in the
expression of his lips, as he gazed on his fragile charge, and placed
her with feminine gentleness on such rude couch as could be afforded;
then addressing Lord Audley, "You are an Englishman," he said, "perhaps
a father?"

"I am an English noble," replied the other; "confide in my care, my
honour; but, to be doubly sure, if you feel distrust, remain with us;
yonder wreck will not weather another night."

"She has seen the suns of two worlds," said the sailor, proudly, "and
the blessed Virgin has saved her at a worse hazard. If she perish now,
it were little worth that her old captain survived: better both go down,
as, if not now, some day we shall, together. I will confide my poor
child to you, my lord. If she recover, she has friends in England; she
would gain them, even if she had them not. Not one among your boasted
island-women is more lovely or more virtuous, than my poor, my
much-suffering Monina."

Lord Audley renewed his protestations. De Faro listened with the
ingenuous confidence of a sailor; he placed several caskets and a
well-filled bag of gold in the noble's hand, saying, "The Adalid fills
a-pace. You but rob the ocean. If my child survives, you can give her
the treasure you disdain. If she does"--and he bent over her; she
almost seemed to sleep, so oppressed was she by feebleness and fever. A
tear fell from her father's eye upon her brow: "And she will: Saint Mary
guide us, we shall attain."

Suck was the strange drama acted on the wide boundless sea. Such the
chances that restored the high-minded Andalusian to England, to the
White Rose, to all the scenes, to every hope and fear which she had
resolved to abandon for ever. For good or ill, we are in the hands of a
superior power:


    "There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
     Rough-hew them how we will."


We can only resolve, or rather endeavour, to act our parts well, such as
they are allotted to us. Little choice have we to seek or to eschew our
several destinations.

With Monina at his side, and his own restless ambition as a spur, it may
be easily imagined what Lord Audley's projects were in joining the
Cornish insurgents. He led them from the western extremity of the
island towards Kent, where he hoped to find the seeds of rebellion to
Lancaster, which he had sown the year before, ripened into harvest. News
of the unimpeded march of the insurgents from Cornwall to the
neighbourhood of London was brought to Edinburgh, freshening the zeal
and animating the preparations for war.

Already the Scottish army was encamped south of Edinburgh. The English
troops set up their tents among them. The day was fixed for the
departure of the king, the prince, and the noble leaders. They quitted
Edinburgh in all the pompous array of men assured of victory. James
loved the hopes and stirring delights of war: Richard saw his every good
in life dependent on this expedition, and fostered sanguine expectation
of triumph. The burning desire of asserting himself, of rewarding his
faithful friends, of decorating Katherine with the rank and honours due
to her--the belief that he should achieve all this--gave dignity and
even gladness, to his last adieu to his lovely wife. Her heart mirrored
his hopes; not that she entertained them for her own, but for his sake:
yet the quicker sensibilities of a woman imparted fears unknown to him.
She concealed them, till when, as her last office and duty, she had
fastened an embroidered scarf around him. Softly, whisperingly, as
fearful of paining him, she said, "You will return--you have a kingdom
here: though England prove false, you must not disdain to be sole
monarch of Katherine."

These words had been spoken--earl, baron, and gallant knight thronged
the courts of Holyrood. There was the sound of warlike trump and the
streaming of painted banners, among which, that of the White Rose waved
conspicuous. The king vaulted on his saddle; the prince of England rode
at his side. He was surrounded by the rude northern warlike chiefs,
ancient enemies of his native land, whose fierce eyes were lighted up by
the expectation of meeting their old adversaries in the field. Could he
fancy that, through such aid, he might win back the crown usurped from
him?

King James and Richard rode side by side. At this moment, when the one
was spending the riches of his kingdom and the lives of his subjects for
the other's sake, while the hearts of both were softened by regret for
their abandoned home, and both anticipated the joys of victory or perils
of defeat to be shared between them, the sentiment of friendship was
rekindled. Never had they been more cordial, more confidential, more
happy in each other's society. After several hours' ride, the short
spring day declined to evening, which was accompanied by a drizzling
rain: the bad roads and the darkness impeded their progress; and it was
night before the twinkling camp-lights appeared in the distance and the
hum of men was heard. To the right of the camp, surrounded by the tents
of his nobles, the royal pavilion was pitched. On their arrival, the
earl of Buchan was in readiness to hold the king's stirrup. "Nay," said
James, "first we will see our royal guest lodged; where is the tent of
his grace of England? we commanded it to be pitched in close
neighbourhood to our own?"

"Please you, my liege," said Buchan, "Lord Moray, gave direction it
should be placed out of our line; it is set up a mile eastward of us."

"My uncle forgot himself; and you also, sir earl, were bound rather to
obey our order," said the king.

"There were reasons," returned Buchan: "your majesty, I dare aver, will
approve the change, and his highness of England also. There was a brawl
between the Scottish borderers and the English; blood has been shed. We
feared that the peace of the encampment, not to say the life of his
highness, would be endangered if he were in the midst of our savage
Southrons."

"I like not this," said James, moodily, "but it is too late to change
to-night. The rain-drops begin to freeze upon my hair; your highness
would rather be in year tent, far though it be from mine, than quarrel
about its position at this inclement hour. Lord Buchan, you will attend
him thither. Prince, goodnight; to-morrow we will be more brotherly in
our fashion; now the fiat of my lord of Moray must be obeyed."

The king dismounted, and entered his pavilion: as the cloth was raised,
a blazing fire, the apparel of silver flagons and golden cups, the trim
appearance of silken-suited pages were visible, making strong contrast
with the cheerless blank without. One slight glimpse revealed the cause,
and partly excused the inhospitality of James, in not inviting his guest
to partake his warm cheer. One in a kirtle sat somewhat retired from
view; the quick motion of her head, the glance of her dark eye, showed
that the monarch had been impatiently expected, and was gladly welcomed
by the lovely daughter of the earl of Cassils.

Lord Buchan accompanied Richard, Lord Barry, and Plantagenet to their
quarters; talking, as he went, of the contention, which had terminated
fatally to several. They rode down the elevated ground on which the
king's tent was placed, over a plashy, low plain, through a little wood
of stunted larch, across a narrow dell, in whose bottom a brook
struggled and murmured, to the acclivity on the other side, on which the
tents of the English troops were pitched; considerably apart from the
rest was Richard's own pavilion: all looked tranquil and even desolate,
compared to the stirring liveliness of the Scotch camp, Richard was
received by Sir George Neville, who looked more than usually cold and
haughty as he bent to Lord Buchan's salutation: the Scotchman uttered a
hasty good night, galloped down the upland and across the dell, and was
lost to sight in the wood.

"What means this, Sir George?" was the prince's first remark: "what
discipline is yours--brawling and bloodshed with our allies?"

"Did your highness name them our enemies," said Neville, "it were more
appropriate. Suspend your displeasure, I beseech you, until I can lay
before you the reality of what you name a brawl; my honour, and I fear
all our safeties are concerned in the discovery. Now, your grace is wet
and fatigued; you will repose?"

Richard desired solitude, not rest: he wished to be alone; for a
thousand intricate ideas possessed him, clamouring to be attended to. He
dismissed his friends. Frion only remained--Frion, who lately had
almost become surly, but who was now smooth, supple as ever; his eye
twinkling as of yore, and his ready laugh--that most characteristic
part of him--again showing the old secretary returned. To the prince's
warm heart, the appearance of discontent and moodiness was peculiarly
grating; the smile or frown even of Frion had power over him; and he
felt grateful to the man for his glossy and satisfactory speeches, now
that, spite of himself, a feeling--it was not fear, but an anticipation
of evil--disturbed his mind.

At length, he dismissed him; yet still he felt utterly disinclined for
sleep. For some time he paced his tent; images of war and battle floated
before him--and then the vision of an angel with golden hair, came, not
to calm, but to trouble him with unquiet regret. In vain he strove to
awaken the flock of gentle thoughts that usually occupied him; his ideas
seemed wolf-visaged; unreal howlings and cries rung in his ears. This
unusual state of mind was intolerable: he folded his cloak round him,
and stepped into his outer tent. Frion, two pages, and his esquire, were
to occupy it; but he found it solitary. This seemed a little strange;
but it was early yet. He lifted the outer cloth; a sentinel was duly at
his post; the prince saluted him and passed on. The fitful winds of
spring had dispersed the storm: the scarcely waning moon, encircled by
the dark clear ether, was in the east; her yellow light filled the
atmosphere, and lay glowing on the trees and little hill-side. The
prince stepped onwards, down the declivity, across the dell, into the
wood. He thought he heard voices; or was it only the swinging branches
of the pines? The breeze raised his hair and freshened his brow. Still
he walked on, till now he came in view of the Scottish camp, which lay
tranquil as sheep in a fold, the moon's bright eye gazing on it. The
sight brought proud Granada and all its towers, with the Christian camp
sleeping at her feet, before his mind; and he still lingered. Now the
tramp of horses became audible: a troop wound down the hill: the leader
stopped exclaiming in some wonder, "My lord of York! does your highness
need any service? do you bend your steps to the royal tent?"

"I blush to answer, Sir Patrick," replied the prince; "for you will
scoff at me as the moon's minion: I came out but to visit her. Yet a
knight need not feel shame at loitering beneath her ray, dreaming of his
lady-love. You are more actively employed?"

"I was on my way to your highness's encampment," replied the knight.
"His majesty is not quite satisfied with Lord Buchan's report, and sent
but now his esquire to me, to bid me visit it. With your good leave, I
will escort you thither."




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE ASSASSIN


     Traitor, what hast thou done? how ever may
     Thy cursed hand so cruelly have swayed
     Against that knight? Harrow and weal-away?
     After so wicked deed, why liv'st thou longer day!

                                                  SPENSER.


When he had been dismissed by his royal master, Frion called aside the
esquire, and sent him on an errand, it would seem of some import and
distance; for the youth uttered a few forcible interjections, and with a
lowering brow drew on the riding-boots he had just doffed, muttering,
"I must treat my horse better than my lord treats me; so, master, seek a
fresh steed. By my fay! this is to become a squire of dames--a
love-token to the duchess, in good hour!"

Having got rid of this young gentleman, Frion's next care was to give
distant employment to the pages, saying he would wait their return. But
scarcely had they entered the most crowded part of the camp, before with
quick cautious steps the secretary took the same path which the prince
trod half an hour later--he crossed the dell, and arriving at the
little wood of larches, instead of traversing, he skirted it, till the
gentle eminence on which the English camp was pitched, grew higher and
more abrupt, the murmuring brook took the guise of a brawling torrent,
grey rocks peeped out from the soil, and the scene became wilder and
more mountainous: he walked on, till he arrived where a rustic bridge
spanned the stream; under its shadow were three horsemen, two of whom
dismounted, and a tall servitor held the bridles. One of these men Frion
knew at once to be him who called himself Lord Bothwell, King Henry's
spy, and Richard's fierce, motiveless, but ruthless enemy; the
other--his bonnet was drawn over his brow--a cloak obscured his
person. Frion's quick eyes scrutinized it vainly, for the moon, cloudy
at intervals, gave uncertain light; besides, the man had stationed
himself within the deepest shadow of the bridge.

"Good befall your watch," said Frion; "your worship is before your
time."

"Is not all ready?" asked Balmayne.

"That question is mine," replied the other. "You know our treaty--not a
hair of my lord's head must be injured."

"Tush! tush! fear not, good conscience-stickier," replied Bothwell, with
a contemptuous laugh; "no ill will befall the boy; we but ferry him over
the Tweed a few hours earlier than he dreamed of, and land him all
gently on the shore he seeks. As for thy reward, I have said, name it
thyself."

"Fair words are these, Sir John Ramsay," said Frion; "but I said before,
I must have surer pledge, both for my reward and my lord's safety. King
Henry will haggle about payment when the work is done, and the steel you
wear is a toper in its way."

"How now, sir knave?" cried Balmayne; "thinkest thou that I will turn
midnight stabber?"

The man in the cloak started at these words. He uttered some sound, but
again drew back; while the person who continued on horseback said, and
his voice was that of the bishop of Moray, King James's uncle, "A truce
to this contention, Master Good-fellow--whatever thy name be: I will
answer for thy pay, and here is earnest of my truth." He threw a purse
at Frion's feet. "The peace of two kingdoms--the honour of a royal, too
long dishonoured house are at stake. No time is this to squabble for
marks, or the paltry life of a base impostor. I, a prince of Scotland,
avouch the deed. It were more friendly, methinks; to unlock his life
with the steel key of our friend Wiatt, than to devote him to the
gallows. Let Scotland be rid of him, I reck not how."

Again Frion fixed his eyes on the other;--the clouds had fallen low in
the sky; the moon was clear; the western breeze murmured among the
bushes and the trees, and the beams of the silvery planet played upon
the unquiet waters. "We have no time for delay. Sir John," said Frion,
"prithee introduce me to our fellow-labourer--this is the king's
emissary? You call yourself Wiatt, Master Black Cloak?"

The other made a gesture of impatience as he stepped aside. Balmayne and
Moray discoursed aside, till the former bade the secretary lead on; as
they went, the Scotchman and Frion conversed in whispers concerning
their plans, while their companion followed as if doggedly. Once he cast
an impatient glance at the moon--Frion caught that look. "Have I found
you, good friend," he thought; "then by our lady of Embrun, you shall
acquit you of the debt I claim this night."

With quicker steps the Provençal proceeded, till they readied the
opening of the valley, and came opposite the slope on which the English
camp was pitched. Furthest off and far apart was the royal pavilion, the
banner of England flapping in the breeze, and this the only sign of
life; but for this, the white silent tents looked like vast Druidical
stones piled upon a wild moor. They paused. "I must go first," said
Frion; "we have wasted more time than I counted for--you will await me
here."

"Listen, Master Frion," said Balmayne. "I would hardly trust you, but
that I think you are a wise man; silver angels and golden marks, as a
wise man, you will love: one thing you will hardly seek, a shroud of
moonbeams, a grave in the vulture's maw. Look ye, one soars above even
now; he scents dainty fare: twenty true men are vowed that he shall sup
on thee, if thou art foresworn: thou wilt give some signal, when all is
ready."

"That were difficult," said Frion; "I will return anon if there be any
let to your enterprise; else, when the shadow of that tall larch
blackens the white stone at your feet, come up without fear: have ye
bonds ready for your prisoner?"

"An adamantine chain--away!" Frion cast one more glance at him called
Wiatt. "It is even he, I know him, by that trick of his neck; his face
was ever looking sideways:" thus assured, the Frenchman ascended the
hill. Balmayne watched him, now visible, and now half-hid by the
deceptive light, till he entered the folds of the pavilion; and then he
glanced his eyes upon the shadow of the tree, yet far from the white
stone; and then paced the sward, as if disdaining to hold commune with
Wiatt. Whatever thoughts possessed this hireling's breast he made no
sign, but stood motionless as a statue; his arms folded, his head
declined upon his breast. He was short, even slight in make, his
motionless, half-shrinking attitude contrasted with the striding pace
and the huge, erect form of the borderer. Who that had looked down upon
these two figures, sole animations visible on the green earth beneath
the moon's bright eye, would have read villany and murder in their
appearance; the soft sweet night seemed an antidote to savageness, yet
neither moon nor the sleeping face of beauteous earth imparted any
gentleness to the Scot; he saw neither, except when impatiently he
glanced at the slow-crawling shadow, and the moonlight sleeping on the
signal-stone. Many minutes passed--Bothwell gave one impatient look
more--how slowly the dusky line proceeded! He walked to the edge of the
brook; there was no movement about the pavilion: tranquil as an infant's
sleep was the whole encampment. Suddenly a cry made him start, it was
from Wiatt; the man, heretofore so statue-like, had thrown his arms
upward with a passionate gesture, and then recalled by Bothwell's
imprecation, shrunk back into his former quiet, pointing only with a
trembling finger to the stone, now deep imbedded in the black shadow of
the larch. The Scot gave a short shrill laugh, and crying "Follow!"
began the ascent, taking advantage of such broken ground and shrubs, as
blotted the brightness of the rays that lit up the acclivity. Bothwell
strode on with the activity of a mosstrooper; Wiatt was scarce able to
walk; he stumbled several times. At length they reached the pavilion;
the Frenchman stood just within, lifting the heavy cloth; they entered.
Frion whispered, "I have cleared the coast; my lord sleeps; we need but
cast a cloak around him, to blind him, and so bear him off without more
ado on his forced journey."

"There is wisdom in your speech," said Balmayne, with something of a
grin. "My friend Wiatt has a cloak large and dark enough for the nonce."

Frion drew back the silken lining of the inner tent, saying, "Tread
soft, my lord ever sleeps lightly; he must not be waked too soon."

"_Never_ were the better word," muttered Bothwell: the dimmest twilight
reigned in the tent. The prince's couch was in shadow; the men drew
near; the sleeper was wrapt in his silken coverlid, with his face buried
in his pillow: his light-brown hair, lying in large clusters on his
cheek, veiled him completely. Ramsay bent over him; his breathing was
heavy and regular; he put out his large bony hand, and, as gently as he
might, removed the quilt, uncovering the sleeper's right side; then
turning to Wiatt, who had not yet advanced, he pointed to the heaving
heart of his victim with such a glance of murderous callousness, that
the very assassin shrunk beneath it; yet he approached; his hand held an
unsheathed dagger, but it shook even to impotence; he raised it over his
prey, but had no power to strike. Frion had crept round behind; a sound
just then, and tramp of feet was heard in the outer tent; as by magic,
in one brief second of time the mute dread scene changed its every
characteristic. The assassin cried aloud, "It is not he!" Frion had
seized his arm--the dagger fell--the pretended sleeper (one of York's
pages) leaped from the couch; and the muffling cloak, dropping from the
murderer's shoulders, disclosed the wretched, degraded Clifford. Ramsay
drew his sword, and rushed towards the outer tent, when at the same
moment Richard of York and Sir Patrick Hamilton showed themselves from
beneath the hangings, which their attendants had raised. This sight
startled Frion, and Clifford, restored to life and energy, tore himself
from his grasp, and in a moment had rushed from beneath the pavilion; he
was forgotten; all eyes were turned on Bothwell; the dagger at his feet,
his drawn sword, his appearance in the retirement of the prince of
England, all accused him. He saw at once his danger, drew himself
proudly up, and returned Hamilton's look with a fierce, haughty glare.

"Thy act is worse than thy enemies' speech," said Sir Patrick, sternly;
"thou wilt answer this, recreant, to thy royal master."

"To him, to any, to you," said Balmayne; "there is my glove. Now, on the
hill's side, or in the lists anon, I will avouch my deed."

Hamilton answered with a look of sovereign contempt; he bade his men
seize the traitor. "Before I sleep," he cried, "the king hears this
treason."

Richard had looked on in silence and wonder; he placed his hand on
Hamilton's arm, stopping him, "Pardon me, valiant knight," he said;
"but, I do beseech you, disturb not the king to-night, nor ever, with
this ill tale. Too roughly already has the English prince broken
Scotland's rest. No blood is shed; and, strange as appearances are, I
take Sir John Ramsay's word, and believe that, as a cavalier, he may
maintain his cause, nor stain by it his knightly cognizance. I take up
your glove, fair sir, but only to restore it; without one slightest
accusation attaching itself to you therewith. Nay, myself will take up
the quarrel, if any blame you. Sir Patrick will not call me to the
trial, I am sure. Frion, conduct the gallant gentleman beyond our
lines."

Shame for the first time flushed Ramsay's brow as he left the tent. The
prince drew up to let him pass, with a mien so dignified and yet so
tranquil, with a smile so bland, that thus it seemed an angelic essence,
incapable of wound, might have gazed on a mere mortal, armed to injure
him.

"Is this recklessness or nobility of soul?" Sir Patrick thought. He did
not doubt, when Richard, changing his look to one of anxious appeal,
besought him to omit utterly to report this strange scene. "I much
fear," he said, "my wily secretary to be most in fault; and I caught a
glance of one, whose appearance here proves that Ramsay is not alone
guilty. Let me inquire, let me learn--punish, if need be. English gold
and English steel were the weapons here, and I alone have power over
England. You will pledge me your word. Sir Patrick, not to disquiet our
royal cousin by our domestic brawls. We must not put in opposing scales
our paltry anger against ruffians like these, and the disquiet of the
generous-hearted James. Ramsay was his father's favourite; for his sake
he bears with him; and more easily may I. I indeed, who am most in
fault, for spending the precious minutes wandering, like a shepherd of
Arcadia, in a listless foolishness, instead of acting the general, and
guarding my tents from such visitors. The brawl last night might have
forewarned me."

"Does it not shame Scotland," cried Hamilton, warmly, "that you should
need any guard but our true hearts, while you tread our soil?"

"Were this true," answered York, yet more earnestly, "remember, what
shames Scotland, shames her king. Be assured, dear cousin, I speak
advisedly. Were this examined, worse might appear; and I and your liege
must be the sufferers: I to excite this treason in his subjects' hearts;
he to prove that some near him are not true as they seem."

Hamilton yielded to these many pleas; but his heart warmed with
admiration and love for the noble being who urged the cause of pardon
for his enemies. "Be it as your highness pleases," he exclaimed. "This I
the more readily yield, since any new attempt kills Hamilton ere it
reach you. I will be your guard, your sentinel, your wide, invulnerable
shield; you will not refuse me this post of honour."

"Or let us both fulfil it," cried York, "one to the other; let us be
brothers in arms, noble Hamilton. And yet, how can I, a fugitive, almost
a tainted man, seek the alliance of one who stands as you do, fair and
free in all men's eyes?"

As he spoke, the prince held out his hand; the Scottish knight raised it
respectfully to his lips. But now Frion returned; and the clash of arms
and trumpets' sound spoke of the advance of night, and change of guard:
the noble friends took leave of each other, and Sir Patrick departed. As
soon as they were private, the prince questioned his secretary closely
and sternly as to the events of the night. Frion had a plausible and
ready tale, of artifice and guile, of how he had a pledge even from the
king's uncle that York's life was not to be attempted; and that he had
but wished to balk and vex them, by causing the page to be carried off:
the discovery of their mistake would shame them from any second
enterprise against the prince of England.

York was but half satisfied; he had caught a transient glimpse of the
fugitive. Was it indeed Clifford, who came a hired murderer to his
bedside? A man who had partaken his heart's counsels, long his
companion, once his friend? It was frightful, it was humiliating but to
imagine how deep the man may fall, who once gives himself over to evil
thoughts, and unlawful deeds. Frion here protested his ignorance and
surprise. It was almost day before his master dismissed him: and even
then, how could Richard repose? That couch, Clifford had marked as his
bier--it were a bed of thorns; he threw himself on the bare hard
ground, and innocence had more power than his angelic pity for the vice
of others; it shed poppy influence on his lids; and the beams of the
morning sun stole softly over, but did not disturb his slumbers.




CHAPTER XXXIV

DISAPPOINTMENT


     Methinks I see Death and the Furies waiting
     What we will do, and all the Heaven at leisure
     For the great spectacle. Draw then your swords!

                                                 BEN JONSON.


Faster than the airy slave quicksilver is influenced by the changes of
the atmosphere, does the subtle essence of the mind of one, who from
love or gratitude hangs upon the smile or frown of another, feel the
sunshine or frost of that other's countenance; and an independent
disposition speedily revolts from servile obedience to such alteration.
On the following day, and afterwards on the succeeding ones, Richard
felt that the heart of James was no longer the same. He was courteous,
kind--his friend's interests formed the sole topic of their
conversations--but York could neither say the thing he wished, nor do
that which he desired; the same objects were before him, apparently the
same colouring was upon them; yet a pale sickly hue was cast over the
before glowing picture; a chill had penetrated the summer warmth in
which he basked; the wave was yet calm, but it was clouded, and no
longer showed in its limpid depths that sympathy and affection which
made the White Rose's fortunes seem truly and intrinsically Scotland's
own.

Friendship was now professed, service tendered; before words had seemed
superfluous--the thing was there. James assured his guest that he would
not turn back, nor give ear to Henry's propositions; and York felt, with
a start, that ear had been, given to them, or this conclusion had not
been noted. The disunion and continued separation of the camps was
another circumstance that spoke loudly of division of thought and
counsel.

Frion believed that he should now resume his ancient position with his
royal master: he bore his reproofs humbly, and strove to regain his
favour by the importance of his services. The arcana of the Tudor party
were, to a great degree, revealed to York; and it was easy to mark the
ascendancy it was gaining. The presence of Lady Jane Kennedy might
explain the ceremony and regulations observed in the intercourse between
the king and his friend; but it was Frion's part to disclose the enmity
this lady entertained for the White Rose, and the influence she exerted
to its detriment. Moray and Lord Buchan were her friends, and they were
frequent visitors in the royal pavilion.

A short time somewhat changed this state of things. The army drew near
the frontier; and the king separated himself from the fair mistress of
his heart. On the third day they arrived on the banks of the Tweed. It
was but crossing a little river--but stepping from one stone to
another, and Richard would stand on English ground.

The troops had passed the day before; some had proceeded southward;
others were even now to be seen defiling in long lines on the distant
plain. The sun was up cheerily; the fresh pleasant green of spring had
stolen, more like a tinted atmosphere, than in the guise of foliage,
over tree and bush; field flowers and crocusses peeped from under the
mossy turf. The scene was a wide moor, varied by broken ground; clumps
of trees, where many a bird nestled; and here and there thick underwood,
where the wild deer made his lair; this had been the scene of a thousand
conflicts, and of mortal carnage between Scot and Englishman, but the
skylark above sang of nature's bounty and nature's loveliness, an
immemorial and perennial hymn, while nothing spoke of the butchery and
wretchedness which once had made the landscape a tragic corpse-strewn
stage.

Reining in his pawing courser, King James, in all the gay array of a
high-born knight, paused on the Scottish bank--his lips, proud as the
Apollo's--spoke of struggle and victory,


             "In his eye
     And nostril, beautiful disdain and might
     And majesty flashed their full lightnings by."


Here was he who, in a later day, led the flower of Scotland to die on
the English plains; who himself was doomed to lie with mangled limbs,
and in blank, cold extinction, a trophy of victory to his enemy, on
Flodden Field: he was alive now, and in his strength; he drank in with
buoyant spirit every glorious anticipation, and laughed with fond
delight; spurring on his horse, he crossed the ford, and entered
England.

In a moment, as by impulse, York, who had lingered, dashed after him;
allies they were; friends in seeming, nay, in truth; for the glance of
proud enmity Richard cast on the Scot was perhaps the more factitious
feeling: it sprang from patriotism, but its energy was borrowed from the
deadly feuds of their ancestors, that natural hate which is said to
exist now between the French and English, and which was far more
envenomed between the near-rival people. Notwithstanding James's change
towards him, York felt in the core of his affectionate heart, all that
was due to him who had raised him when he was fallen; given him state,
power--Katherine; he saw in him his kinsman--his benefactor. But the
pride of a son of England rose in his breast, when he beheld the haughty
Scot caracol in arrogant triumph on her soil. What was he? What had he
done? He was born king and father of this realm: because he was
despoiled of his high rights, was he to abjure his natural duty to her,
as her child? Yet here he was an invader; not arming one division of her
sons against the other, but girt with foreigners, aided by the ancient
ravagers of her smiling villages and plenteous harvests. He looked on
each individual Scot, and on their gallant king, and felt his bosom
swell with rage and hate. These were unwise, nay, ungrateful sentiments;
but he could not repel them. His first commands were to his cousin, to
hasten to Randal of Dacre, to learn what Yorkists had gathered together
to receive him. "If there be any large company," he said, "without more
ado we will thank our kind cousin, invite him to recross the Tweed, and
leave us to fight our battles by ourselves."

The satisfaction and triumph James felt made him, so far from
participating in York's feelings, turn with renewed cordiality towards
him. It was his first care to have the standard of the White Rose set up
with martial pomp, to disperse his proclamations, and to invite, by his
own manner, the Scottish nobles to increase in observance towards the
prince. Lord Huntley, believing that the prophecy of his daughter's
elevation was on the eve of its accomplishment, was prodigal of his
shows of honour and service to his son-in-law. For some days the
pavilions of the brother kings were pitched side by side, and James each
hour thought to hear of the arrival of the Yorkist nobility of England:
he had expected so many that he had given orders that care should be
taken to recall his own troops, when the English visitants outnumbered
his own guard. Day after day passed, and not one came--not one: even
Randal of Dacre, Lord Dacre's brother, who had visited Richard in
Scotland, seized with panic, had gone southward. Nothing came, save
intelligence that the Cornish insurgents had been defeated on
Blackheath, their ringleaders taken and executed; among them Lord Audley
perished.

Another life!--how many more to complete the sad hecatomb, a useless
offering to obdurate fate in Richard's favour! Sir George Neville,
gathered up in all the cold pride of disappointed ambition, disdained to
regret. Plantagenet saw the hopes and purpose of his life crushed, but
dared not give words to his despair; Sir Roderick sneered; Lord Barry
was loud in his laments; while the Scots grew taller and prouder, and
ceased to frequent the tents of the English exiles. Councils were held
by James, in which York had no part; it was only afterwards, that he
learnt it had been commanded to the Scotch army to lay waste the
country. Now indeed all the Englishman was alive in his heart--he gave
sudden orders to raise his camp, and to march forward; he had sat still
too long; he would enter the kingdom he claimed; discover for himself
his chance of success--and, if there were none, his rights should not
be made the pretence of a Scotch invasion.

None cried, "Long live King Richard!" as he passed along. How did his
noble, youthful spirit droop at finding that not only he did not meet
with, but was judged not to deserve success. It ranks among the most
painful of our young feelings, to find that we are justly accused of
acting wrong. Our motives--we believed them disinterested or
justifiable; we have advanced a wondrous step in life before we can
concede even to ourselves that alloy may be mingled with what we deemed
pure gold: ignorant of the soil and culture of our own hearts, we feel
sure that no base mixture can form a part of what we fancy to be a mine
of virgin ore, Richard would have stood erect and challenged the world
to accuse him--God and his right, was his defence. His right! Oh,
narrow and selfish was that sentiment that could see, in any right
appertaining to one man the excuse for the misery of thousands.

War, held in leash during the army's march from Edinburgh, was now let
loose; swift and barbarous he tore forward on his way; a thousand
destructions waited on him; his track was marked by ruin: the words of
Lord Surrey were fulfilled. What a sight for one, whose best hope in
acquiring his kingdom, was to bestow the happiness of which the usurper
deprived it. The English troops, about five hundred men, crossed the
wide-spread plains in the immediate vicinity of Scotland; they entered a
beaten track, where the traces of cultivation spoke of man; a village
peeped from among the hedge-row trees--York's heart beat high. Would
the simple inhabitants refuse to acknowledge him? A few steps disclosed
the truth--the village had been sacked by the Scotch: it was half
burnt, and quite deserted; one woman alone remained--she sat on a pile
of ashes wailing aloud. The exiles dared not read in each other's eyes
the expression of their horror; they walked on like men rebuked. This
was England, their country, their native home; and they had brought the
fierce Scot upon her. Passing forward, they met trains of waggons laden
with spoil, droves of cattle and sheep. They overtook a troop roasting
an ox by the burning rafters of a farm-house, whose green palings, trim
orchard, and shaved grass-plat, spoke of domestic comfort; the house-dog
barked fearfully--a Lowland archer transfixed him with his arrow.

The English marched on; they dared not eye the ravagers; shame and hate
contended--these were their allies; while the sarcasm and scornful
laugh which followed them, drugged with wormwood the bitter draught. In
vain, west or east or south, did they turn their eyes, a sad variety of
the same misery presented itself on every side. A stout yeoman, gashed
by an Highlander's claymore, was sometimes the ghastly stepping-stone
passed over to enter his own abode; women and children had not been
spared, or were only left to perish for want. Often during apparent
silence, a fearful shriek, or the voice of lamentation, burst upon the
air: now it was a woman's cry, now the shrill plaint of infancy. With
the exception of these sufferers, the landscape was a blank. Where were
the troops of friends Richard had hoped would hail him? Where the
ancient Yorkists? Gone to augment the army which Surrey was bringing
against the Scot; attached to these ill-omened allies, how could the
prince hope to be met by his partizans? He had lost them all; the first
North Briton who crossed the Tweed trampled on and destroyed for ever
the fallen White Rose.

Resolutely bent on going forward till he should have advanced beyond the
Scotch, on the following day York continued his march. They entered the
ruins of another village; the desolation here was even more complete,
although more recent; the flame was hardly spent upon the blackened
rafters; the piles which the day before had been smiling dwellings,
still smoked; a few domestic animals were skulking about. There was a
church at the end of what had been a street; this was not spared. The
English entered the desecrated aisle; an aged bleeding monk was lying at
the altar's foot, who scowled even in death upon the soldiery; suddenly
he recognized his countrymen; pleasure gleamed in his sunken eyes, "Ye
will avenge us! Deliver the land!--The hand of God will lead ye on!"

Plantagenet rushed forward--"Father!" he cried, "do I find you here?"

The old man spoke, looked faintly; Edmund bent over him: "My father, it
is I, Edmund, your boy, your murde----"

"My son," said the monk, "I behold you again, and die content! You are
in arms, but by the blessing of the saints your sword's point is turned
against the cruel invader. Not one, oh! not one Englishman will fall by
his brother's hand, for not one will fight for that base deceit, the
ill-nurtured Perkin, to whom God in his wrath has given such show of
right as brings the Scot upon us. Once I thought--but no son of York
would ally himself to these cruel border-robbers. God of my country, oh
curse, curse him and his cause!"

The dying man spoke with difficulty; a few moments more, a spasm crossed
his features, and they settled into stony insensibility. Edmund threw
himself on the body; a deathlike silence reigned in the building; every
heart beat with breathless horror; the curse uttered by the murdered man
was even then breathed before God, and accepted. York spoke first with a
calm, firm voice, "Arise, my cousin," he said; "do not thou fix yet more
deeply the barbed arrow, which has entered my heart."

There are periods when remorse and horror conquer by their intensity
every lesser impulse, and reign kings of the waste; this was no time for
words or tears. Oh! welcome the grief or crime, which the bitterest of
these could express or extenuate; it would insult this sad effigy of
death to imagine that the impiety could be expiated. In silence they
bore the reverend corpse to the vaults of the church, and then continued
their way; some of the under-officers and men whispered together; but
when again the chiefs conversed, they did not allude to this frightful
scene, or to the awful imprecation which they felt suspended over their
heads, shadowing their souls with unknown horror.

This was but the opening scene to worse wretchedness; hitherto they had
seen the waste of war, now they came upon its active atrocities. A dense
smoke, the flickering of pale flames, marked the progress of
devastation; fierceness gleamed in the open blue eyes of Richard; he bit
his lips, and at a quicker pace went forward; screams and horrid
shrieks, mixed with shouts--oh! may not a veil be drawn over such
horrors--flying children, mothers who stayed to die, fathers who
unarmed rushed upon the weapons of the foe; fire and sword, animated by
man's fellest spirit, were there to destroy. Kindled to fury, York and
his chief friends had outspeeded their troops: they came to save; they
called on the fierce Scot to spare; and, when their words were unheeded,
they drew their swords to beat back their allies. A fresh troop of
Borderers, headed by Sir John Ramsay, at this moment poured into the
village. The grey eye of the Scot was lighted up to the fiercest rage;
but when he saw who and how few were they who had assailed his men, a
demoniac expression, half exultation and joy, half deadly hate, animated
him. Richard was driving before him a whole troop of camp-followers,
cowardly and cruel fellows. Balmayne's hand was on his arm. "Your
Highness forgets yourself," he said; "or is the fable ended, and you
turned friend of Tudor?"

York's blood was up; his cheek, his brow were flushed; the word
"assassin" burst from his lips, as he wheeled round and assailed his
midnight foe. Thus a natural war began; English and Scotchmen, bent on
mutual destruction, spurred on by every feeling of revenge, abhorrence,
and national rivalship, dealt cruel blows one on the other. Richard's
troops began to arrive in greater numbers; they far out-told their
adversaries. Lord Bothwell, with his marauders, was obliged to retreat,
and York was left in possession of his strange conquest. The peasantry
gathered round him: they did not recognize the White Rose, they but
blessed him as their deliverer: yet the sufferers were many, and the
flames still raged. One woman with a wild shriek for her children, threw
herself into the very heart of her burning cot; while, statue-like,
amidst a little helpless brood, his wife at his feet a corpse, his
dwelling in ashes, a stout yeoman stood; tears unheeded flowing down his
weather-beaten cheeks. During the whole day Richard had striven against
his own emotions, trying to dispel by pride, and indignation, and
enforced fortitude, the softness that invaded his heart and rose to his
eyes, blinding them; but the sight of these miserable beings, victims of
his right, grew into a tragedy too sad to endure. One young mother laid
her infant offspring at his feet, crying, "Bless thee; thou hast saved
her!" and then sunk in insensibility before him; her stained dress and
pallid cheeks speaking too plainly of wounds and death. Richard burst
into tears, "Oh my stony and hard-frozen heart!" he cried, "which
breakest not to see the loss and slaughter of so many of thy
natural-born subjects and vassals!"

He spoke--he looked: Plantagenet was there, grief and horror seated in
his dark, expressive eyes; Neville, who had lost his lofty pride; it was
shame and self-abhorrence that painted their cheeks with blushes or
unusual pallor. "We must hasten, my lord," said Barry, "after those
evil-doers: they but quit one carcase, to pounce upon another."

"Do we fight the king of England's battles?" cried the Burgundian
Lalayne, in unfeigned astonishment: "this will be strange intelligence
for James of Scotland."

"So strange, Sir Roderick," said Richard, "that we will be the bearers
of it ourselves. Give orders for the retreat, gentlemen. His majesty is
engaged in the siege of Norham Castle. We will present us before him,
and demand mercy for our unhappy subjects."




CHAPTER XXXV

THE RETREAT


     Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
       And make me travel forth without my cloak,
     To let base clouds o'ertake me on the way,
       Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?

                                               SHAKSPEARE.


It was York's characteristic to be sanguine beyond all men. Pain
impressed him more deeply and sorely, than could be imagined by the cold
of spirit; but show him the remedy, teach him the path to redress, and
he threw off the clogging weight of care, and rose free and bright as in
earliest youth. His impatience to behold his royal friend, to speak the
little word, which he felt assured would recall the Scots from their
ravages, and take from him the guilt of his subjects' blood, grew like a
torrent in the spring:--he outspeeded his main troop; he left all but
his chiefest friends behind; one by one even these grew fewer; he
mounted a fresh horse, it was the third that day--"May-flower is worse
than blown," said Neville; "will not your highness repose till
to-morrow?"

"Repose!"--this echo was his only answer, and already he was far and
alone upon his way.

The Scottish lines were passed, and the embattled walls of Norham, grey
and impenetrable as rock, were before him; the royal pavilion occupied
the centre of the camp. The wearied steed that bore York dropt on one
knee as he reined him up before it, flushed, with, every mark of travel
and haste--he threw himself from his saddle, and entered the tent: it
was thronged; he saw not one face, save that of the monarch himself, who
was conversing with a churchman, whose dark foreign countenance Richard
had seen before; now it was like a vision before him. James, in an
accent of surprise, cried, "My lord, this is an unexpected visit."

"Excuse ceremony, my dear cousin," said York; "I come not to speak to
the majesty of Scotland: man to man--a friend to his dearest friend--I
have a suit to urge."

James, who was aware that his actual occupation of listening and even
acceding to the suggestions of his foreign visitant, in favour of peace
with Henry, was treason to York's cause, thought that news of Don Pedro
D'Ayala's arrival was the secret of these words: he blushed as he
replied, "As friend to friend, we will hear anon--to-morrow."

"There is no anon to my dear plea," said York; "even now the hellish
work is about which you must check. Oh, what am I, king of Scotland,
that I am to be made the curse and scourge of my own people? The name of
Richard is the bye-word of hate and terror, there, where I seek for
blessings and filial love. You know not the mischief your fierce
Borderers achieve--it is not yet too late; recall your men; bid them
spare my people; let not the blood of my subjects plead against my
right; rather would I pine in exile for ever, than occasion the
slaughter and misery of my countrymen, my children."

Richard spoke impetuously; his eyes filled with tears, his accents were
fraught with passionate entreaty, and yet with a firm persuasion that he
spoke not in vain: but his address had the very worst effect. James
believed that, hearing that he was in treaty with his foe, he had come
to re-urge his suit, to enforce the many promises given, to demand a
continuation of the war. James, a Scotchman, bred in civil strife among
fierce Highlanders and ruthless Borderers, saw something contemptible in
this pity and supplication for cottagers and villains: the shame he had
felt, or feared to feel, at the idea of being accused of treachery by
his guest, was lightened; his lips were curled even to scorn, as in a
cold tone he replied, "Sir, methinketh you take much pains, and very
much strive to preserve the realm of another prince, which, I do
believe, never will be yours."

A momentary surprise set open wide York's eyes; he glanced round him;
the earl of Huntley's brow was clouded; a smile curled Lord Buchan's
lips; the emotion that had convulsed the prince's features, gave place
to the calmest dignity. "If not mine," he said, "let me yield the sway
to the lady Peace: the name and presence of a Plantagenet shall no
longer sanction the devastation of his country. I would rather be a
cotter on your wild Highlands, than buy the sovereignty of my fair
England by the blood of her inhabitants."

The warm, though capricious heart of James, was quietly recalled by the
look and voice of his once dearest friend, to a sense of the
ungraciousness of his proceeding: he frankly stretched out his hand; "I
was wrong, cousin, forgive me, we will confer anon. Even now, orders
have been issued to recall the troops; a few words will explain
everything."

York bent his head in acquiescence. The king dismissed his nobles, and
committed to the care of one among them the reverend D'Ayala. With a
strong sentiment of self-defence, which was self-accusation--a half
return of his ancient affection, which acted like remorse--James set
himself to explain his proceedings. Fearful, unaided by any of the
natives, of proceeding with an inadequate force farther into the heart
of the country, he had set down before the castle of Norham, which was
defended undauntedly by the bishop of Durham. He had wasted much time
here; and now the Cornish insurgents being quelled, the earl of Surrey
was marching northwards, at the head of forty thousand men. Surrey,
Howard, might he not be a masked friend? "who," continued James, "has
surely some personal enmity to your highness; for the reverend Father
D'Ayala, an ambassador from Spain, visited him on his journey northward,
and it seems the noble indulged in despiteful language; saying, that he
who could bring the fell Scot (I thank him) into England, wore manifest
signs of--I will not say--I remember not his words; they are of no
import. The sum is, my dear lord, I cannot meet the English army in the
open field; walled town--even those paltry towers--I cannot win: with
what shame and haste I may, I must retreat over the border."

Many more words James, in the heat of repentant affection, said to
soothe his English friend. York's blood boiled in his veins; his mind
was a chaos of scorn, mortification, and worse anger against himself.
The insult inflicted by James before his assembled lords, the bitter
speech of Surrey; he almost feared that he deserved the one, while he
disdained to resent the other; and both held him silent. As speedily as
he might, he took leave of the king: he saw signs in the encampment of
the return of the foragers; they were laden with booty: his heart was
sick; to ease his pent-up burning spirit, when night brought solitude,
though not repose, he wrote thus to the Lady Katherine:--


"Wilt thou, dear lady of my heart, descend from thy lofty state, and
accept an errant knight, instead of a sceptered king, for thy mate?
Alas! sweet Kate, if thou wilt not, I may never see thee more: for not
thus, oh not thus, my God, will Richard win a kingdom! Poor England
bleeds: our over-zealous cousin has pierced her with dismal wounds; and
thou wouldst in thy gentleness shed a thousand tears, hadst thou beheld
the misery that even now, grim and ghastly, floats before my sight. What
am I, that I should be the parent of evil merely? Oh, my mother, my too
kind friends, why did ye not conceal me from myself? Teaching me lessons
of humbleness, rearing me as a peasant, consigning me to a cloister, my
injuries would have died with me; and the good, the brave, the innocent,
who have perished for me, or through me, had been spared!

"I fondly thought that mine was no vulgar ambition. I desired the good
of others; the raising up and prosperity of my country. I saw my
father's realm sold to a huckster--his subjects the victims of
low-souled avarice. What more apparent duty, than to redeem his crown
from Jew-hearted Tudor, and to set the bright jewels, pure and sparkling
as when they graced his brow, on the head of his only son? Even now I
think the day will come when I shall repair the losses of this sad
hour--is it the restless ambitious spirit of youth that whispers future
good, or true forebodings of the final triumph of the right?

"Now, O sweetest Kate, I forget disgrace, I forget remorse; I bury every
sorrow in thought of thee. Thy idea is as a windless haven to some
way-worn vessel--its nest in a vast oak-tree to a tempest-baffled
bird--hope of Paradise to the martyr who expires in pain. Wilt thou
receive me with thine own dear smile? My divine love, I am not worthy of
thee; yet thou art mine--Lackland Richard's single treasure. The stars
play strange gambols with us--I am richer than Tudor, and but that thy
husband must leave no questioned name, I would sign a bond with
fate--let him take England, give me Katherine. But a prince may not
palter with the holy seal God affixes to him--nor one espoused to thee
be less than king; fear not, therefore, that I waver though I
pause--Adieu!"




CHAPTER XXXVI

TIDINGS FROM IRELAND


     Yet noble friends, his mixture with our blood,
     Even with our own, shall no way interrupt
     A general peace.

                                              FORD.


Pedro D'Ayala was ambassador from Ferdinand and Isabella to the king of
England. There was something congenial in the craft and gravity of this
man with the cautious policy of Henry. When the latter complained of the
vexation occasioned him by the counterfeit Plantagenet, and the favour
he met with in Scotland, D'Ayala offered to use his influence and
counsel to terminate these feuds. He found James out of humour with
York's ill success among the English, weary of a siege, where
impregnable stone walls were his only enemies, uneasy at the advance of
Surrey; pliable, therefore, to all his arguments. A week after D'Ayala's
arrival, the Scots had recrossed the Tweed, the king and his nobles had
returned to Edinburgh, and York to Katherine.

Richard's northern sun was set, and but for this fair star he had been
left darkling. When the English general in his turn crossed the Tweed,
and ravaged Scotland, _he_ was looked on by its inhabitants as the cause
of their disasters; and, but that some loving friends were still true to
him, he had been deserted in the land which so lately was a temple of
refuge to him. The earl of Huntley exerted himself to prevent his
falling into too deep disgrace in the eyes of Scotland, and was present
at the consultations of the exiles to urge some new attempt in some
other part of King Henry's dominions. York was anxious to wash out the
memory of his overthrow; so that this check, which seemed so final to
his hopes, but operated as an incentive to further exertions. Yet
whither should he go? the whole earth was closed upon him. The territory
of Burgundy, which had so long been his home, was forbidden.
France--Concressault, who was his attached friend, dissuaded him from
encountering a mortifying repulse there. Even his own Spain would refuse
to receive him, now that D'Ayala had shown himself his enemy; but, no,
he was not so far reduced to beg a refuge at the limits of civilization;
still he had his sword, his cause, his friends.

A stranger came, an unexpected visitant from over the sea, to decide his
vacillating counsels. The man was aged and silver-haired, smooth in his
manners, soft-voiced, yet with quick grey eyes and compressed lips,
indications of talent and resolution and subtlety. Frion saw him first,
and, deceived by his almost fawning manners into an idea of his
insignificance, asked his purpose and name. The stranger with the utmost
gentleness refused to disclose his object to any but the prince; and
Frion, with great show of insolence, refused to introduce him to his
presence. "Then without thy leave, sir knave," said the old man calmly,
"I must force my way."

Astley, the poor scrivener of Canterbury, was present. This honest,
simple-hearted fellow, had shown so much worth, so much zeal, so much
humbleness with such fidelity, that he had become a favourite in York's
court, and principally with the Lady Katherine. Frion hated him, for he
was his opposite, but pretended to despise him, and to use him as an
underling. Astley meekly submitted, and at last gained a kind of favour
in the Frenchman's eyes by the deference and respect of his manner. The
stranger, with the readiness of one accustomed to select agents for his
will, addressed him, bidding him announce to his highness a gentleman
from Ireland. "And be assured," he said, "the duke will ill-requite any
tardiness on thy part."

An angry burst from Frion interrupted him. This man, rarely off his
guard, but roused now by recent mortifications, forgot himself in the
violence he displayed, which strangely contrasted with the soft
tranquillity of the stranger, and Astley's modest, but very determined
annunciation of his resolve to convey the message to the prince. Frion,
from loud words, was about to proceed to acts, when Lord Barry
entered--Barry, who felt Scotland as a limbo of despair, who was for
ever urging Richard to visit Ireland, to whom the court life of the
English was something like a trim-fenced park to a new caught lion.
Barry saw the stranger--his eyes lighted up, nay, danced with sudden
joy: with no gentle hand he thrust Frion away, and then bent his knee,
asking a blessing of the prior of Kilmainham; and in the same breath
eagerly demanded what had brought the venerable man from Buttevant
across the dangerous seas.

Keating's presence gave new life to York's councils: he brought an
invitation from Maurice of Desmond to the duke. The earl had, since
Richard's departure, been occupied in training troops, and so fortifying
himself as to enable him to rise against Poynings, whose regular
government, and above all, whose predilection for the Butlers, caused
him to be detested by the Geraldines. Hurried on by hatred and revenge,
Desmond resolved to do that which would be most dreaded and abhorred of
Henry--to assume the badge of the White Rose, and to set up the
pretensions of young Richard. The tidings were that York was a loved and
honoured guest in Edinburgh; and the impetuous Desmond feared that he
would hardly be induced to abandon King James's powerful alliance, for
the friendship of a wild Irish chieftain. The very invitation must be
committed to no mean or witless hands: the difficulties appeared so
great, that the measure was on the point of being abandoned, when the
prior of Kilmainham, who, in the extreme of age, awoke to fresh life at
a prospect of regaining his lost consequence, offered himself to
undertake the arduous task. His views went far beyond the earl's: he
hoped to make the king of Scotland an active party in his plots, and to
contrive a simultaneous invasion of England from the north and from the
west. Already his turbulent and grasping spirit saw Irish and Scotch
meeting midway in England, and with conjoined forces dethroning Tudor,
and dictating terms to his successor. He came too late: he came to find
a peace nearly concluded between James and Henry; the White Rose fallen
into disregard; and his arrival looked, upon as the best hope, the last
refuge of his fallen party.

Richard on the instant accepted his invitation. To a generous heart the
feeling of enforced kindness succeeding to spontaneous affection, is
intolerable. The very generosity of his own disposition made him recoil
from exacting a reluctant boon from his sometime friend. To live a
pensioner among the turbulent, arrogant Scots, was not to be thought of.
The earl of Huntley, in fond expectation of his daughter's greatness,
would have despised him had he remained inactive. Even Katherine was
solicitous to leave Scotland--she knew her countrymen; and, ready as
she was to give up every exalted aim, and to make her husband's
happiness in the retired quiet of private life, she knew that insult and
feud would attend his further tarrying among the Scotch.

York had been for nearly a year the guest of King James; twelve months,
in all their long-drawn train of weeks and days, had paced over the wide
earth, marking it with change: each one had left its trace in the soul
of Richard. There is something frightful, to a spirit partly tired of
the world, to find that their life is to be acquainted with no durable
prosperity; that happiness is but a modification of a train of events,
which, like the fleeting birth of flowers, varies the year with
different hues. But York was still too young to be aweary even of
disappointment; he met the winter of his fortunes with cheerful
fortitude, so that a kind of shame visited James, inspired by the
respect his injured friend so well merited.

The capricious, but really noble heart of the Scottish king was at this
time put to a hard trial. One of the preliminaries of peace, most
insisted upon by Henry, was, that his rival should be given up to
him:--this was, at the word, refused. But even to dismiss him from his
kingdom, seemed so dastardly an act towards one allied to him by his own
choice, that the swelling heart of the cavalier could not yet tame
itself to the statesman's necessity. Some of his subjects, meanwhile,
were ready enough to cut the Gordian knot by which he was entangled.
Tudor had many emissaries in Edinburgh; and Lord Moray, Lord Buchan, and
the dark Both well, whose enmity had become fierce personal hate, were
still egged on by various letters and messages from England to some deed
of sanguinary violence.

Sir John Ramsay was sought out by Frion. That goodly diplomatist must
have entertained a high opinion of his mollifying eloquence, when he
dared encounter the hot temper of him he had dishonoured in the eyes of
the English prince, and of his own countryman Hamilton. But Frion knew
that in offering revenge he bought pardon: he was of little mark in
Ramsay's eyes, while the man he had injured, and whom he consequently
detested beyond every other, survived to tell the grating tale of the
defeated villany of the assassin, and the godlike magnanimity of him who
pardoned.

Frion's own feelings, which had vacillated, were now fixed to betray the
prince. He had wavered, because he had a kind of personal affection for
the noble adventurer. Somehow he managed to fancy him a creature of his
own: he had worked so long, and at one time so well for him, that he had
fostered the vain belief that his dearest hopes, and best pretensions,
would vanish like morning mist, if he blew unkindly on them. It was not
so: James had been his friend; Huntley had given him his daughter
without his interference; and the Irish project, with Keating at its
head, who treated Frion with galling contempt, filled up the measure of
his discontents. If anything else had been needed, the Lady Katherine's
favour to Astley, and some offices of trust, in which York himself had
used him, sufficed to add the last sting to malice. "If they will not let
me make, they shall rue the day when I shall mar; learn shall they, that
Frion can clip an eagle's wings even in its pride of flight."

It is common to say that there is honour among thieves and villains. It
is not honour; but an acknowledged loss of shame and conscience, and a
mutual trust in the instinctive hatred the bad must bear the good, which
strongly unites them. In spite of the Frenchman's former treachery,
Balmayne felt that he could now confide, that his guilt would stretch
far enough to encircle in its embrace the very act he desired; and he
again trusted, and used him as the chief agent of his plots.

The earl of Surrey was ravaging Scotland; and King James, with the
chivalrous spirit of the times, challenged him to single combat. The
earl, in answer, refused to place his master's interests at the hazard
of his single prowess, though ready for any other cause to accept the
honour tendered him. The herald that brought this reply, Frion reported
to Richard to be charged with a letter to him. Its purpose was to
declare, that though, while aided and comforted by the enemies of
England, the earl warred against him, yet the Howard remembered the
ancient attachments of his house; and that, if the White Rose, wholly
renouncing the Scotch, would trust to the honour of the representative
of a race of nobles, the army now in the field to his detriment should
be turned to an engine of advantage. "Time pressed," the letter
concluded by saying--"and if the duke of York were willing to give his
sails to the favouring wind, let him repair with a small company to
Greenock, where he would find zealous and powerful friends."

At first this intimation filled the prince with exultation and delight.
The time was at last come when he should lead the native nobility of
England to the field, and meet his enemy in worthy guise. There was but
one check; he could not join Surrey, while Surrey was in arms against
his once generous friend; so that, by a strange shifting of events, he
now became anxious for peace between Scotland and England; eager that
the seal should be set that destroyed the alliance and amity which had
so lately been the sole hope of his life. Neville and Plantagenet
entered into his views; and while, seemingly at the bottom of Fortune's
scale, a new spirit of gladness animated this little knot of Englishmen.

For one thing young Richard was not prepared: the preliminaries of peace
he knew were arranged, and he was aware that its conclusion would take
the sword out of James's hand. They had rarely met lately; and this,
while it lessened the familiarity, rather added to the apparent kindness
of their interviews. There was in both these young princes a genuine
warmth of heart, and brightness of spirit, that drew them close whenever
they did meet. James honoured the integrity and the unconquered soul of
the outcast monarch, while his own genius, his vivacity, and polished
courtesy, in spite of his caprice and late falling off, spread a charm
around that forced admiration and affection even from him he injured. It
was at this period, that, notwithstanding their real disunion, Richard
felt it as strange to find his royal host confused in manner, and
backward of speech. They had been at a hunting party, where Lord Moray's
haughty glance of triumph, and the sneer that curled the earl of
Buchan's lip, would have disclosed some victory gained by them, had York
deigned to regard their aspects. At length, after much hesitation, while
riding apart from his peers, James asked--"If there were any news from
the Lady Margaret of Burgundy?"

"Sir Roderick Lalayne returned to her a month ago," replied York, "and
with him went my dear and zealous Lady Brampton, to urge fresh succour
for one, to whom fortune has so long shown a wintry face, that methinks
spring must at last be nigh at hand, herald of bright, blossoming
summer."

"What promises then my lady duchess?" said the king, eagerly.

"Alas! her promises are as blank as her power," replied Richard. "Even
when the old dukes of Burgundy were as emperors in Christendom, they
were but as provosts and city-magistrates in the free towns of Flanders;
and these towns resolve on peace with England."

"It is the cry of the world," said James, with a sigh; "this Tudor is a
mighty man. Why, even I, a Scot, a warrior, and a king, am forced to
join the universal voice, and exclaim, 'Peace with England,' even though
my honour is the sacrifice."

"Your majesty imparts no strange truth to me," said York. "I have long
known that this must be; but surely you speak in soreness of spirit,
when you speak of the sacrifice of honour. I thought the terms agreed on
were favourable to Scotland?"

"King Henry demanded, in the first place, the delivery of your highness
into his hands." James blushed deeply as he said these words.

"Or he will come seize me," rejoined the duke, with a laugh. "In good
hour I will deliver myself, if he will walk through the bristling
lances, and set at naught the wide-mouthed cannon that will bellow in
his path."

"Have you then new hopes?" cried the king; "oh! say but so; and half my
shame, and all my sorrow vanishes. Say that you have hope of speedy good
in some other country; for I have sworn, ere April wear into May,
Scotland shall be made poor by your highness's absence."

A long pause followed these words. James felt as if he had given words
to his own concealed dishonour, and struck his iron-girdled side with
the bitter thought. "O! spirit of my father, this may not atone; but I
must pay also in shame and torturous self-contempt for my heavy guilt."
A sudden blow, a precipitous fall when unaware his feet had reached the
crumbling brink of a beetling precipice, would not have made such
commotion in Richard's heart, as the forced and frightful conviction
that the friend he had trusted heaped this insult on him. For the first
time in his life, perhaps, pride conquered every other feeling; for
reproach had been more _friendly_, than the spirit that impelled him, with
a placid voice, and a glance of haughty condescension, to reply:--"Now
that your majesty dismisses me, I find it fittest season to thank you
heartily for your many favours. That you deny me to the suit of your new
ally, and send me forth scathless from your kingdom, is the very least
of these. Shall I forget that, when, a wanderer and a stranger, I came
hither, you were a brother to me? That when an outcast from the world,
Scotland became a home of smiles, and its king my dearest friend? These
are lesser favours; for your love was of more value to me than your
power, though you used it for my benefit; and, when you gave me the Lady
Katherine, I incurred such a debt of gratitude, that it were
uncancelled, though you cast me, bound hand and foot, at Tudor's
footstool. That I am bankrupt even in thanks, is my worst misery; yet,
if the eye of favour, which I believe Fortune is now opening on me,
brighten into noon-day splendour, let James of Scotland ask, and, when
England shall be added to his now barren name, Richard will give, though
it were himself."

"Gentle cousin," replied the king, "you gloss with horrid words a bitter
pill to both; for though the scath seem yours, mine is the punishment. I
lose what I can ill spare, a kinsman and a friend."

"Never!" cried York; "Scotland bids a realmless monarch, a beggar
prince, depart: the king of Scotland, moved by strong state necessity,
is no longer the ally of the disinherited orphan of Edward the Fourth:
but James is Richard's friend; he will rejoice, when he sees him, borne
with the flowing tide, rise from lowness to the highest top at which he
aims. And now, dear my lord, grant me one other boon. I am about to
depart, even of my own will; dismiss then every rankling feeling; lay no
more to your generous, wounded heart, a need, which is even more mine
than yours; but let smiles and love attend your kinsman to the end,
unalloyed by a deeper regret, than that fate wills it, and we must
separate."




CHAPTER XXXVII

TREACHERY


             I am your wife,
     No human power can or shall divorce
     My faith from duty.

                                     FORD.


                                ----With
     My fortune and my seeming destiny,
     He made the bond, and broke it not with me.
     No human tie is snapp'd betwixt us two.

                                   SCHILLER'S WALLENSTEIN.


Frion believed that he held the strings, which commanded the movements
of all the puppets about him. The intrigues of party, the habitual use
of ill means to what those around him deemed a good end, had so
accustomed him to lying and forgery, that his conscience was quite
seared to the iniquity of these acts; truth to him was an accident, to
be welcomed or not according as it was or was not advantageous to his
plots.

King James prepared a fleet for the conveyance of the prince; and the
earl of Huntley, as a matter of course, promised to entertain his
daughter royally, until, in a palace in Westminster, she should find her
destined title and fit abode. The Lady Katherine thanked him, but
declared that she was nothing moved from her bridal vow, and that she
never would desert Richard's side. All that her father urged was of no
avail. State and dignity, or their contraries, humiliation and disgrace,
could only touch her through her husband; he was her exalter or debaser,
even as he rose or fell; it was too late now to repine at degradation,
which it ill beseemed the daughter of a Gordon to encounter; it was
incurred when she plighted her faith at the altar; wherever she was it
must be hers. As a princess, she was lost or redeemed by her husband's
fortunes. As a woman, her glory and all her honour must consist in never
deviating from the straight line of duty, which forbade her absence from
his side.

The earl disdained to reason with a fond doting girl, as he called the
constant-minded lady, but applied to the king, representing how it would
redound to his discredit, should a princess of his blood wander a
vagrant beggar over sea and land. James had passed his royal word to
Katherine, that she should have her will on this point; and when, at her
father's suit he tried to dissuade her, he was at once silenced by her
simple earnest words; "Ask me not," she said, "to place myself on the
list of unworthy women: for your own honour's sake, royal cousin, permit
your kinswoman to perform a wife's part unopposed. You and my father
bestowed me, a dutiful subject, an obedient daughter, according to your
will; you transferred my duty and obedience; and truly as I paid it to
you, so will I keep it for my lord."

"What can we reply, my good earl marshal," said James, turning to
Huntley, "I rebelled against the religion through which I reign, did I
deny our sweet Kate free allowance to follow the dictates of her
generous heart. Nor let us grudge the White Rose this one fair bloom.
Love, such as Katherine feels, love, and the dearest, best gift of
God--alas! too oft denied to poor humanity, and most to
me--self-complacency, arising from a good conscience, will repay her
every sacrifice."

Huntley retired in high indignation; his will was opposed; his word,
which he deemed a law, had but a feather's weight. The blood of the
Gordon was stirred to rage; and he broke forth in fierce and cruel
expressions of anger, calling his daughter ingrate--her lord base, and
a traitor. Such muttered curses were reported to Lord Buchan: in the
scheme on foot, they had somewhat dreaded to incur Huntley's displeasure
and revenge, knowing how dearly he prized the hope of royalty for his
daughter; but now they fancied that they might draw him in ere he was
aware to approve their deed. The crafty Frion was set on to sound him;
the iron was hot, most easily to their eyes, it took the desired form.

Huntley was a Scot, cunning even when angry--cautious when most
passionate. The first intimations of the conspiracy were greedily
received by him. He learnt the falsehood of the letter pretending to
come from the earl of Surrey; and the use that was to be made of this
decoy to seize on the duke of York's person. He did not scruple to
promise his assistance; he reiterated his angry imprecations against his
unworthy son-in-law; he thanked Frion with cordial warmth for affording
him this opportunity for revenge; he declared his gratitude towards the
confederate nobles; and the Frenchman left him, with the full belief
that he was ready to lend his best aid to deliver over the English
prince to ignominy and death.

Such was the end of King Henry's last scheme to obtain possession of his
too noble, too excelling rival, by means of Scottish fraud, and the
treason of York's dependants. The earl of Huntley conducted the whole
affair with the utmost secrecy. Apparently he acted the part designed
for him by the conspirators. He reconciled himself to the prince; he
urged an instant compliance with Surrey's invitation. The English had
asked for some guarantee of Surrey's truth. Huntley obviated this
difficulty. Through his intervention a new and sufficing impulse was
given. Richard appointed the day when he should repair to Greenock,
there to meet the envoy who was to lead him to Lord Surrey's presence.
In the harbour of Greenock rode the bark which was to convey him to his
English prison. King Henry's hirelings were already there: Frion
conducted the victims blindfold into the net: they had meant to have
gathered together a troop of ruffian borderers to prevent all
resistance; but Huntley promised to be there himself with a band of
Highlanders. The whole thing only seemed too easy, too secure.

The wily secretary had overshot his mark in taking so readily for
granted Huntley's assent to the ruin of the duke of York. He had come
upon him in his angry hour: his honied words were a dew of poison; his
adjurations for peace, oil to fire. Then, as the noble strode through
the hall, imprecating vengeance, he slid in words that made him stop in
full career. Men are apt to see their wishes mirrored in the object
before them; and, when the earl bent his grey eyes upon the Provençal
and knit his time-furrowed brow in attention and interest, Frion saw the
satisfaction of a man on the brink of dear revenge. He was far a-field.
The very rage in which the earl had indulged, by a natural reaction,
softened him towards his children; and when the traitor spoke of schemes
ripe to deliver York into his adversary's hands, he recoiled at once
from the path of vengeance opened before him, and listened with horror
to the detail of a conspiracy which would tear the very shadow of a
diadem from his daughter's brow; yet he listened, and his words still
enticed the over-wily Frion. "Balmayne," said the earl, "all must
succeed even to the death. Where he intermeddles, he is ruthless;" thus
ran his comments: "My good Lord Buchan, what the foul fiend makes him so
busy? English gold! Yes: Buchan loves the gilding better than the strong
iron that it hides. The honour of the royal house, my most reverend
uncle! Is his animosity so stirring? Oh! priests are your only haters.
So Richard's tale is told. The chroniclers will speak of Duke Perkin, of
the canker that ate out the heart of Gordon's fair rose, the gibbet,
instead of a throne, to which she was wed; a fair eminence! My Kate will
hardly ascend it with him: she must halt at the gallows' foot." These
words, said with bitterness, seemed to Frion the boiling sarcasm of an
exasperated parent. The man's vanity was the trap in which he was
caught: he could not believe that a savage Scot, an untaught Highlander,
could enter the lists with one nurtured in the subtle atmosphere of
Provence, with the pupil of Louis the Eleventh; a man schooled in
eastern lore, who had passed a whole life of contrivance and deceit.

The Scottish nobles, Moray, Buchan, and Bothwell, were satisfied in
having given their countenance to the English hirelings; and now that
the more powerful Huntley promised to watch over the execution of their
designs, they were glad enough to withdraw from the rude and
inhospitable act. Huntley had everything in his own hands. He, with a
party of Highlanders, escorted the duke and duchess of York, with their
friends and attendants, to Greenock. Frion had never shown himself so
humble or so courteous; he seemed afraid that any one of his victims
should escape: he was particularly anxious to entice his old enemy, the
prior of Kilmainham, into the snare. His readiness and vivacity were
remarked by all: it was attributed to the high hopes he entertained of
his royal master's success through the alliance of the earl of Surrey;
and, while York expressed his affectionate approbation, he smiled
blandly, and painted every feature in the very colouring he wished it to
wear.

The vessel rode at anchor; the English sailors, on the arrival of York,
went on board, got her under weigh, and dropped down the coast. With the
dawn Lord Howard of Effingham, with a chosen troop, was, according to
the false hopes of Richard, to arrive at the rendezvous, a wood about
two miles south of the town, bordering the sands of the sea. Here the
English emissaries were congregated, and here a score of Highlanders
were in ambush, to assist in the capture of the White Rose. Hither, even
before dawn, the wakeful Frion came, to announce the speedy arrival of
his lord. He found his English friends in some anxiety. Clifford, who,
under the name of Wiatt, had been chief among them, was seized with
panic or remorse, and had gone on board the vessel, which had east
anchor but a few furlongs from the shore. The others were mean
underlings: Frion's presence gave them courage; he was elated; his laugh
was free; he had neither doubt nor scruple; no, not even when he turned
from the vulgar, brutalized countenances of these ruffians, to behold
the princely victim in all the splendour of innocence, with one beside
him so lovely, that the spirit of good itself had selected her form for
its best earthly bower; or to see Edmund, whose dark eyes beamed with
unknown joy, and Neville, whose haughty glance was exchanged for a glad
smile. The man's sole thought was exultation at his own cleverness and
success, in having inveigled so many of the noble and the brave to this
dark fate.

"What tidings of Effingham?" asked York.

"Are ye ready?" cried Huntley.

"All!" replied Frion; "all save him ye name Wiatt. Sir Robert, forsooth,
is but half a man, and never does more than half deed, though that half
makes whole crime. All is ready. I hear the sound of oars; the boat
nears the shore."

Through the tall bare trunks of the trees, a glimpse of the beach might
be gained; the roaring of the surges was distinct, now mingled with the
cry of sailors.

"Then lose we no time," said Huntley. "My lord of York, these words
sound strange. You expected a noble countryman to lead you to victory;
you find nameless fellows, and the prince of knaves, most ready and
willing to lead you to everlasting prison. Lo, the scene shifts again!
Never be cast down, Master Frion; you are as subtle as any of your
race--only to be outwitted by a niggard Scotchman, who can ill read,
and worse write; except when villany is blazoned in a man's face, and
his sword indites a traitor's fate. Your clerkship will find none among
us learned enough to afford you benefit of clergy."

Huntley drew his sword; and at the signal his Highlanders arose from
their ambush. Prion was seized and bound. None, who even a moment before
had seen the smooth-faced villain, could have recognized him; he was
pale as the snow on Ben Nevis. A Highlander, an adept in such acts,
dexterously threw a knotted rope over his head, and cast his eye up to
the trees for a convenient branch. Such had been the orders; such the
summary justice of the earl.

Richard meanwhile looked on the blanched visage and quailing form of his
betrayer in mere compassion. "Is it even so, Etienne!" he said; "and
after long companionship we part thus."

The trembling craven fell on his knees, though he tightened the halter
by the movement, so that when Richard turned away, saying, "I had
thought better of thee: Jesu pardon thee as readily as I--farewell!" he
had scarce voice to cry for mercy.

"Aye," cried the Gordon; "such mercy as we grant the wolf and thievish
fox. Short shrift be thine, Master Secretary!"

"By Our Lady's grace, stay!" said Katherine; "do not kill the
false-hearted knave. He is a coward, and dares survive his honour; let
him live."

Richard looked sternly on the kneeling slave. To the good there is
something awful in the sight of a guilty man. It is a mystery to them
how the human heart can be so perverted. Is it a spirit from hell that
incorporates itself with the pulsations of our mortal bosom; a darkness
that overshadows; a fiendish essence that mingles with the breath God
gave to his own image? York felt a shrinking horror. "Thou hast pursued
me since my youth," he said, "forcing thyself into my councils;
sometimes as a wily enemy; at others befriending me in seeming, raising
my soul, that flagged beneath the world's unkind ministry; dropping balm
by thy words into a wounded heart; to end thy office thus! Was this thy
purpose ever; or what demon whispered thee to betray? Die! oh no! too
many, the good, the great, the true, have died for me; live thou a
monument--a mark to tell the world that York can pardon, York can
despise--not so base a thing as thee--that were little, but even thy
employer. Go, tell my sister's husband that I bear a charmed life; that
love and valour are my guards. Bid him bribe those, nor waste his
ill-got crowns on such as thee. Unbind him, sirs; make signal to the
boat; let him on board; the wind stands fair for England."

The fall of many a hope, roused by the forgery on Surrey's name, was
forgotten by Richard, as he sickened at this other mark of man's
wickedness and folly. He was surely the dear sport of fortune, a tale to
chronicle how faithless friends may be. If such thoughts, like summer
clouds, darkened his mind, they vanished, driven by the winds of life
that bore him onward. This was no time for mere gloomy meditation.
Though he was obliged to return to his forgotten Irish scheme, and to
dismiss the glorious anticipation in which he had indulged, of leading
the chivalry of England to the field; though no real defeat had ever
visited him so keenly as this mockery of one; yet he was forced to
forget himself, and to apply himself to console and rouse his downcast
friends; but his skill was well repaid, and soon he again awoke to those
feelings of buoyant hope, unwearied energy, and unshaken confidence
which were the essence of his character.

In this last trial he felt how much good he might derive from the
sweetness and constant spirit of the Lady Katherine. She hoped for none
of the world's blessings, except they came in the shape of loves from
him to whom she was united; happiness--all hers as centred in her
blameless affections; and her confidence was placed in the belief and
knowledge, that by devoting herself to her lord, to the wandering
outcast who so dearly needed her sacrifice, she fulfilled her destiny
upon earth, and pleased "the great Task Master," who for happiness or
misery, but certainly for good, had given her life. All her gentle
eloquence was spent in dissuading Richard from those unkind thoughts
towards his species, which the treason of these base men, the caprice of
James, the harsh sentence (for this was again brought home to him by
disappointment) of Surrey, awakened in his bosom. It proved no hard
task; soon the princely adventurer, with eagle flight, soared from the
sad prostration of spirit, the birth of his disasters, to fresh hopes
and lofty resolves.

It was necessary immediately to prepare for his departure. The earl of
Huntley, struck by his magnanimity, no longer opposed his daughter's
wish. The English exiles were eager for a new, and, they believed (for
untired is hope in man), for a prosperous career. Scotland grew rude,
confined, and remote in their eyes. In Ireland were placed for them the
portals of the world, to be opened by their swords; the dancing
sea-waves invited them; the winds of heaven lent themselves to their
service. "My friends," said Richard, "dear and faithful partners of my
wayward fortunes, I would fondly believe that we are favoured of Heaven.
We are few; but the evil and the treacherous are no longer among us. And
does old Time in all his outworn tales tell any truer, than that the
many, being disunited, and so false, have ever been vanquished by the
loving, bold, and heroic few? That a child may scan with its fingers our
bare arithmetic, will therefore be to us the source of success, as
assuredly it will be of glory. The English were few when they mowed down
thickly-planted French at Cressy and Poictiers. Which among us, armed as
we are in the mail of valour, but would encounter ten of Tudor's
scant-paid mercenaries? For me! I do believe that God is on my side, as
surely as I know that justice and faith are; and I fear no defeat."

It is thus that man, with fervent imagination, can endue the rough stone
with loveliness, forge the misshapen metal into a likeness of all that
wins our hearts by exceeding beauty, and breathe into a dissonant trump
soul-melting harmonies. The mind of man--that mystery, which may lend
arms against itself, teaching vain lessons of material philosophy, but
which, in the very act, shows its power to play with all created things,
adding the sweetness of its own essence to the sweetest, taking its
ugliness from the deformed. The creative faculty of man's soul--which,
animating Richard, made him see victory in defeat, success and glory in
the dark, the tortuous, the thorny path, which it was his destiny to
walk from the cradle to the tomb.

Oh, had I, weak and faint of speech, words to teach my fellow-creatures
the beauty and capabilities of man's mind; could I, or could one more
fortunate, breathe the magic word which would reveal to all the power,
which we all possess, to turn evil to good, foul to fair; then vice and
pain would desert the newborn world!

It is not thus: the wise have taught, the good suffered for us; we are
still the same; and still our own bitter experience and heart-breaking
regrets teach us to sympathize too feelingly with a tale like this;
which records the various fortunes of one who at his birth received
every gift which most we covet; whose strange story is replete with
every change of happiness and misery; with every contrast of glorious
and disgraceful; who was the noble object of godlike fidelity, and the
sad victim of demoniac treason; the mark of man's hate and woman's love;
spending thus a short eventful life. It is not spent; he yet breathes:
he is on the world of waters. What new scene unfolds itself? Where are
they who were false, where those who were true! They congregate around
him, and the car of life bears him on, attended by many frightful, many
lovely shapes, to his destined end. He has yet much to suffer; and,
human as he is, much to enjoy.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

DEPRESSION


     One moment these were heard and seen; another
     Past, and the two who stood beneath that night,
     Each only heard, or saw, or felt the other.

                                               SHELLEY.


The hour had now arrived when Richard took leave of Scotland. The king
was humbled by the necessity he felt himself under, of sending forth his
friend and kinsman into the inhospitable world; and he felt deep grief
at parting with his lovely cousin. She grew pale, when for the last time
she saw the friend of her youth. But Katherine looked upon life in a
mode very different from the usual one: the luxuries and dignities of
the world never in her mind for a moment came in competition with her
affections and her duty; she saw the plain path before her; whatever her
father's or her royal cousin's idea had been in giving her to the duke
of York, she knew that, being his, her destiny upon earth was to share
his fortunes, and soothe his sorrows. This constant looking on, giving
herself up to, and delighting in one aim, one object, one occupation,
elevated her far above the common cares of existence. She left


                    ----"All meaner things,
     The low ambition and the pride of kings,"


--to shroud herself in love; to take on herself the hallowed state of
one devoting herself to another's happiness. Cleopatra, basking in sunny
pomp, borne, the wonder of the world, in her gilded bark, amidst all the
aroma of the east, upon the gently-rippling Cydnus, felt neither the
pride nor joy of Katherine, as, on the poor deck of their dark
weather-beaten skiff, she felt pillowed by the downy spirit of love,
fanned by its gentle breath.

The duke of York was more depressed; he thought of how, since his
miserable childhood, he had been the sport of Fortune and her scorn. He
thought of the false, the cold, the perished: a dark wall seemed to rise
around him; a murky vault to close over him: success, glory, honour, the
world's treasures, which he had been brought up to aspire to as his
dearest aim, his right, were unattainable; he was the defeated, the
outcast; there was a clog in his way for ever; a foul taint upon his
name. Thus seated on the deck, his arm coiled round a rope, his head
leaning on his arm, while the stars showered a dim silvery radiance, and
the sparkling sea mocked their lustre with brighter fires; while the
breeze, that swelled his sail, and drove him merrily along, spent its
cold breath on him; he, painting all natural objects with the obscure
colouring suggested by his then gloomy spirit, distorting the very
scenery of heaven and vast ocean into symbols of his evil fate, gave
himself up to the very luxury of woe,--meanwhile the shadow of a lovely
form fell on him, soft fingers pressed the curls of his hair, and
Katherine asked, "Are the nights of Andalusia more glorious than this?"

At the voice of the charmer the demon fled; sky and sea cast off the dim
veil his grief had woven, and creation was restored its native beauty.
Hitherto the halls of palaces, the gaiety of a court, the
council-chamber, had been the scenes in which the princely pair had
lived together; linked to an engrossing state of things, surrounded by
their partisans, they had been friends, nay lovers, according to the
love of the many. But solitary Nature is the true temple of Love, where
he is not an adjunct, but an essence; and now she alone was around them,
to fill them with sublime awe, and the softest tenderness. In Richard's
eyes, the kingdom of his inheritance dwindled into a mere speck; the
land of her nativity became but a name to Katherine. It sufficed for
their two full hearts that they were together on the dark wide sea; the
bright sky above, and calm upon the bosom of the deep. They could ill
discern each other in the shadowy twilight; a dream-like veil was cast
over their features, as sleep curtains out the soul, so that we look on
the beloved slumberer, and say, "He is there, though the mystery of
repose wraps me from him;" so now darkness blinded and divided them: but
hand clasped hand; he felt that one existed who was his own, his
faithful; and she rejoiced in the accomplishment of the master-sentiment
of her soul, the desire of self-devotion, self-annihilation, for one who
loved her. The passion that warmed their hearts had no fears, no tumult,
no doubt. One to the other they sufficed; and, but that the trance is
fleeting, Happiness, the lost child of the world, would have found here
her home; for when love, which is the necessity of affectionate hearts,
and the sense of duty, which is the mystery and the law of our souls,
blend into one feeling, Paradise has little to promise save immortality.

For many days this state of forgetful ecstasy lasted. Plantagenet and
Neville spoke of wars in England; Lord Barry and Keating of their Irish
schemes--the prince listened and replied; but his soul was far
away--Oh, that for ever they might sail thus on the pathless, shoreless
sea!--Nothing mean or trivial or ignoble could visit them; no hate, no
care, no fear--this might not be, but to have felt, to have lived thus
for a few short days, suffices to separate mortal man from the groveling
part of his nature--no disgrace, no despair can so bring him back to
the low-minded world, as to destroy the sense of having once so existed.
And Richard, marked for misery and defeat, acknowledged that power which
sentiment possesses to exalt us--to convince us that our minds, endowed
with a soaring, restless aspiration, can find no repose on earth except
in love.




CHAPTER XXXIX

SIEGE OF WATERFORD


     "Now for our Irish wars!"

                           SHAKSPEARE.


Again the duke of York approached the rocky entrance of the Cove of
Cork, again he passed through the narrow passage, which opening,
displayed a lovely sheet of tranquil water, decked with islands. The
arrival of his fleet in the harbour was hailed with joy. Old John
O'Water had returned to his civic labours, and had contrived to get
himself chosen mayor for this year, that he might be of greater
assistance to the White Rose in his enterprise.

As soon as the arrival of his ships off the coast was known, O'Water
despatched messengers to the earl of Desmond, and busied himself to
give splendour to Richard's entrance into Cork. Tapestry and
gay-coloured silks were hung from the windows; the street was strewn
with flowers--citizens and soldiers intermixed crowded to the
landing-place. York's heart palpitated with joy. It was not that thence
he much hoped for success to his adventure, which required more than the
enthusiasm of the remote inhabitants of the south of Ireland to achieve
it: but Cork was a sort of home to him; here he had found safety when he
landed, barely escaped from Trangmar's machinations--here he first
assumed his rightful name and title--here, a mere boy, ardent,
credulous, and bold--he had seen strangers adopt his badge and avouch
his cause. Five years had elapsed since then--the acclaim of a few kind
voices, the display of zeal, could no longer influence his hopes as then
they had done, but they gladdened his heart, and took from it that
painful feeling which we all too often experience--that we are cast
away on the inhospitable earth, useless and neglected.

He was glad also in the very first spot of his claimed dominions whereon
he set foot, to see the Lady Katherine received with the honours due to
her rank. Her beauty and affability won the hearts of all around, and
O'Water, with the tenderness that an old man is so apt to feel towards a
young and lovely woman, extended to her a paternal affection, the
simplicity and warmth of which touched her, thrown as she was among
strangers, with gratitude.

Lord Desmond arrived--he was struck by the improvement in York's
manner, still ingenuous and open-hearted: he was more dignified, more
confident in himself than before--the husband of Katherine also
acquired consideration; as an adventurous boy, he might be used
according to the commodity of the hour--now he had place--station in
the world, and Desmond paid him greater deference, almost unawares.

But the earl was sorely disappointed; "Reverend Father," said he to
Keating, "what aid does Scotland promise? Will they draw Tudor with his
archers and harquebusiers, and well-horsed knights, to the north,
giving our Irish kern some chance of safe landing in the west?"

"Peace is concluded between Scotland and England," replied Keating.

Desmond looked moody. "How thrives the White Rose over the water? How
sped the duke, when he entered England? Some aid somewhere we must have,
besides yonder knot of wanderers, and our own hungry, naked kerns."

"By my fay!" replied Keating, "every budding blossom on the Rose-bush
was nipped, as by a north-east wind. When Duke Richard sowed his hopes
there, like the dragon's teeth of Dan Cadmus, they turned into so many
armed men to attack him."

"Sooth, good prior," said the earl, with a sharp laugh, "we shall speed
well thereby: would you a re-acting of the gleeful mime at Stowe?"

"Wherefore," said Keating, "fix your thoughts on England? The dark sea
rolls between us, and even the giants of old broke their causeway, which
in the north 'tis said they built, ere it laid its long arm on the
English shore. The name of Ireland reads as fair as England; its sons
are as brave and politic, able to defend, to rule themselves: blot
England from the world, and Ireland stands free and glorious, sufficing
to herself. This springal, valorous though he be, can never upset
Tudor's throne in London; but he can do more for us by his very
impotence. He is the true lord of Ireland: we are liegemen in
maintaining his right. Plant his banner, rally round it all men who wish
well to their country; drive out the good man Poynings; crush the
Butlers--aye, down with them; and when Richard is crowned King of Erin,
and the Geraldines rule under him, our native land will stand singly,
nor want England for a crutch--or, by'r Lady! for a spear to enter her
heart, while she leaneth on it; so the wars of York and Lancaster may
free us from the proud, imperious English; and the Irish, like the
Scotch, have a king and a state of their own."

Desmond's eyes flashed for a moment, as Keating thus presented before
them the picture he most desired to behold; but they grew cold again.
"The means, reverend prior, the arms, the money, the soldiers?"

"A bold stroke brings all: strike one blow, and Ireland is at our feet.
We must not tarry; now the Butlers and their party are asleep in their
security; gather men together; march forward boldly; strike at the
highest, Dublin herself."

"Father," replied the earl, "long before I were half way there, my
litter would be abandoned even by its bearers, and we left alone among
the bogs and mountains, to feed as we may, or die. If there be any sooth
in your scheme, it can only prove good, inasmuch as we secure Connaught
to ourselves, and turn this corner of the island into a kingdom; but
neither one word, nor one blow, will gain Dublin. You are right so
far,--something must be done, and speedily; and, if it be well done, we
may do more, till by the aid of the blessed St. Patrick and
white-tooth'd Bridget! we tread upon the necks of the Butlers."

This one thing to be undertaken, after much consultation among the
chieftains, was the siege of Waterford: it had been summoned to
acknowledge Duke Richard as its lord, and had refused: Keating was very
averse to spending time before a fortified town. "On, on, _boutez en
avant_!" He reminded Lord Barry of his device, and strove to awaken
ambition in him. The prior of Kilmainham had spent all his life in
Dublin, a chief member of the government, a seditious, factious but
influential man: the capital to him was all that was worth having,
while, to these lords of Munster, the smallest victory over their
particular rivals, or the gaining a chief city in a district, which was
their world, appeared more glorious than entering London itself
victoriously, if meanwhile Waterford, or any one of the many towns of
Ireland, held out against them.

On the fifteenth of July, 1497, the duke of York, the earl of Desmond,
and the other many chief of many names, some Geraldines, all allied to,
or subject to them, as the O'Briens, the Roches, the Macarthys, the
Barrys, and others, assembled at Youghall, a town subject to the earl of
Desmond, and situated about midway between Cork and Waterford, at the
mouth of the river Blackwater.

On the twenty-second of July the army was in movement, and entered the
county of Waterford; the chiefs, at the head of their respective
followers, proceeded to the shrine of St. Declan at Ardmore, to make
their vows for the success of their expedition. The church at Ardmore,
the round tower, the shrine, and healing-rock, were all objects of
peculiar sanctity. The countess of Desmond, and her young son, and the
fair duchess of York, accompanied this procession from Youghall. After
the celebration of mass, the illustrious throng congregated on the rocky
eminence, on which the mysterious tower is built, overlooking the little
bay, where the calm waters broke gently on the pebbly beach. It was a
beauteous summer-day; the noon-day heat was tempered by the sea breeze,
and relieved by the regular plash of the billows, as they spent
themselves on the shore. A kind of silence--such silence as there can
be among a multitude, such a silence as is preserved when the winds sing
among the pines--possessed the crowd: they stood in security, in peace,
surrounded by such objects as excited piety and awe; and yet the hopes
of the warrior, and, if such a word may be used, a warrior's fears,
possessed them; it was such a pause as the mountain-goat makes ere he
commits himself to the precipice. A moment afterwards all was in motion;
to the sound of warlike instruments the troops wound up the Ardmore
mountains, looking down on the little fleet that stemmed its slow way
towards the harbour of Waterford. The ladies were left alone with few
attendants. The young duchess gazed on that band of departing warriors,
whose sole standard was the spotless rose; they were soon lost in the
foldings of the hills; again they emerged; her straining eye caught
them. That little speck upon the mountain-side contained the sole hope
and joy of her life, exposed to danger for the sake of a little good;
for Katherine, accustomed to the sight of armies, and to the
companionship of chiefs and rulers, detected at once the small chance
there was, that these men could bring to terms a strongly fortified
city; but resignation supplied the place of hope; she believed that
Richard would be spared; and, but for his own sake, she cared little
whether a remote home in Ireland, or a palace in England received them.
She looked again on the mountain path; no smallest moving object gave
sign of life; the sunlight slept upon the heathy uplands; the grey rocks
stood in shadowy grandeur; Katherine sighed and turned again to the
chapel, to offer still more fervent prayers, that on this beauteous
earth, beneath this bright genial heaven, she might not be left
desolate: whatever else her fortune, that Richard might be hers.

The army which the earl of Desmond led against Waterford, did not
consist of more than two thousand men. With these he invested the
western division of the city. Richard, with his peculiar troop, took his
position at the extremity of this line, nearest Passage, close to
Lumbard's Marsh, there to protect the disembarkment of troops from the
fleet.

Neither party failed in zeal or activity. The first days were actively
employed in erecting works and bringing the cannon to play upon the
town. On the third, in the very midst of their labours, while the earl
in his litter was carried close under the walls among the pioneers, and
Lord Barry in his eagerness seized a spade and began to work, signals of
attack were made from the town, and the troops poured out from the
nearest gate. The advanced guard were too few to contend with them; they
were driven back on the entrenchments. The citizens were full of fury
and indignation; they rushed forward with loud cries, and created a
confusion, which Desmond and Lord Barry were not slow to encounter; they
brought a few regular troops to stand the assault; a well pointed cannon
from the town swept the thin lines; they fell back; a yell of victory
was raised by the men of Waterford; it reached the outpost of Duke
Richard: he, with a score of men, five among them, with himself, being
cavaliers armed at all points, were viewing a portion of the walls that
seemed most open to assault; the roar of cannon and the clash of arms
called him to more perilous occupation; he galloped towards the scene of
action; and, while still the faltering men of Desmond were ashamed to
fly, yet dared not stand, he, with his little troop, attacked the enemy
on their flank. The white steed, the nodding plume, the flashing sword
of York were foremost in the fray; Neville and Plantagenet were close
behind; these knights in their iron armour seemed to the
half-disciplined Irish like invulnerable statues, machines to offend,
impregnable to offence; twenty such might have turned the fortunes of a
more desperate day: their antagonists fell back. The knight of Kerry led
on at this moment a reinforcement of Geraldines, and a cannon, which
hitherto had been rebel to the cannoneer's art, opened its fiery mouth
with such loud injurious speech, that for many moments the dread line it
traced remained a blank. Richard saw the post of advantage, and
endeavoured to throw himself between the enemy and the city: he did not
succeed; but, on the contrary, was nearly cut off himself by a
reinforcement of townsmen, sent to secure the retreat of their fellows.
Those who saw him fight that day spoke of him as a wonder: the heart
that had animated him in Andalusia was awake; as there he smote to death
the turbaned Moor, so now he dealt mortal blows on all around, fearless
of the pressing throng and still increasing numbers. While thus hurried
away by martial enthusiasm, the sound of a distant trumpet caught his
ear, and the echo of fire-arms followed; it came from the east--his own
post was attacked: now, when he wished to retreat, he first discerned
how alone and how surrounded he was; yet, looking on his foes he saw,
but for their numbers, how despicable they were; to a knight, what was
this throng of half-armed burghers and naked kerns, who pell-mell aimed
at him, every blow ineffectual? But again the loud bellow of distant
cannon called him, and he turned to retreat--a cloud of missiles
rattled against him; his shield was struck through; the bullets
rebounded from his case of iron, while his sword felled an enemy at
every stroke; and now, breaking through the opposing rank on the other
side, his friends joined him--the citizens recoiled. "Old Reginald's
tower," they averred, "would have bled sooner than these Sir
Tristans--they were charmed men, and lead and good arrowheads were
softer than paper-pellets on their sides." The first movement of panic
was enough; before their leaders could rally them again to the attack,
the English knights were far, riding at full speed towards the eastern
gate.

Here Richard's presence was enough to restore victory to his
standard--flushed, panting, yet firm in his seat, his hand true and
dangerous in its blows, there was something superhuman in his strength
and courage, yet more fearful than his sharp sword. The excess of
chivalrous ardour, the burning desire to mingle in the thickest fight,
made danger happiness, and all the terrible shows of war entrancing joys
to York. When reproached for rashness by his cousin, his bright eye was
brighter for a tear, as he cried, "Cousin, I must have some part of my
inheritance: my kingdom I shall never gain--glory--a deathless
name--oh, must not these belong to him who possesses Katherine? The
proud Scots, who looked askance at my nuptials, shall avow at least that
she wedded no craven-hearted loon."

With the morrow came a new task. Their little fleet had made its way up
Waterford Harbour into the river Suir; and the troops destined to join
his were partly disembarked. To protect the landing, he and Neville rode
across the marsh to the strand. On their return a fresh sight presented
itself--the ponds of Kilbarry were filled, the besieged having raised a
mound of earth to stop the course of the river which flows from Kilbarry
into the Suir; and the road back to their camp was completely cut off.
There was no mode of getting round save by the road to Tramore; yet to
the active mind of Richard, it seemed that even this disaster might be
turned into a benefit. He re-embarked the troops; he himself went on
board the principal vessel; he called to secret council the
captains:--the conclusion was not immediately divulged, but some
adventure of peril was assuredly planned among them.

The long summer day went slowly down; the hum of men from Waterford
reached the ships; the quay was thronged with soldiers: several vessels
were anchored in the advance, and manned with troops; but the English
fleet, their anchors cast, their sails furled, seemed peacefully
inclined. As night came on, the quay became a desert; the ships were
worked back to their former stations. It grew darker; the city, with its
old rough tower and spires, was mirrored indistinctly in the twilight
tide; the walls grew dim and gigantic; the sound of fire-arms ceased;
the last roll of the drum died away; the city slept, fearless of its
invaders. At this moment, the ebbing tide began to flow. Assisted by the
rising waters, Richard and Neville ran a small boat under the cover of
the opposite bank of the river, to observe what defences the quay might
possess. The low tide at that hour was its best defence; a watch-tower
or two with their sentinels, completed the guard of a part of the town,
whose defence on that side was neglected; by midnight also the tide
would have risen, but it was necessary to wait for the following night;
for first he must communicate with Desmond, that a night attack in the
opposite direction might effectually leave the water-side deserted. The
vessels meanwhile dropped down below Little Island, at once to get out
of shot of Reginald's Tower, which commands the harbour, and to remove
from the citizens any apprehensions they might entertain of attack. The
winding of the river concealed them entirely from the town.

The next day, a burning August day, declined into a dewy night;
imperceptibly during the dark the vessels were nearer the city; and
while the warders of the city fancied that the troops on board the fleet
were finding a circuitous path over land to Desmond's camp, the stars of
night twinkled through the shrouds upon decks crowded with men, arming
themselves in busy silence. Suddenly it was reported to Richard that a
stranger caravel was among them; she was the only vessel with set sails,
and these were enlarged by night, till as she neared, she seemed a
giant, a living thing stalking between heaven and the element beneath. A
sudden shiver convulsed the prince; to his eye it was the likeness of
that vessel which long ere this had traversed, he hoped in safety, the
western sea, stemming its mountainous waves towards the beauteous Indian
Isles. Had it been wrecked, and this the spectre? It was the illusion of
a moment; but it was necessary to ascertain the nature and intentions of
the stranger, who was now close among them. York's vessel, at his
command, got alongside of her; he leapt upon the deck, and saw at once
him whom the dim night had concealed before, Hernan de Faro upon the
deck.

A thousand emotions--wonder, fear, delight--rushed into the youth's
heart; while the mariner, yet more weather-beaten, thin to emaciation,
but still erect, still breathing the same spirit of fortitude and
kindliness, grasped his hand, and blessed the Virgin for the meeting.
The questions, the anxiety of Richard, could not be uttered in this hour
of action; he only said, "You will join us, and we will be doubly
strong; or must you remain to guard your daughter?"

"I come from her--she is not with me--more of this anon."

Rapidly he asked and obtained information of the meditated attack; in
part he disapproved, and, with all the sagacity of a veteran in such
enterprises, suggested alterations. Now every boat was lowered with
silent expedition, each received its freight of troops, and was rowed
with the tide up the Suir. One skiff contained York and the Moor. The
prince, in the anticipation of the hazardous contest, looked serious;
while every feature of De Faro's face was bright, his animated, glad
smile, his flashing eyes--all spoke the exhilaration of one engaged in
his elected pleasure. Richard had never seen him thus before: usually he
appeared kind, almost deferential; yet, except when he talked of the
sea, heavy and silent, and speaking of that in a subdued tone. He now
stood the picture of a veteran hero, self-possessed and calm, but for
the joyousness that the very feeling of his sword's weight, as his right
hand grasped the hilt, imparted to his warlike spirit.

Had an angel, on poised wings of heavenly grain, hovered over the city
of Waterford, gazing on its star-pointing spires, the reflecting waters
of the Suir, the tranquil hills and woods that gathered round the river,
he would have believed such quiet inviolate, and blessed the sleep that
hushed the miserable passions of humanity to repose. Anon there came the
splash of waters, the shout of men, the sentinels' startled cry, the
sudden rush of the guard, the clash of swords, the scream, the low
groan, the protracted howl, and the fierce bark of the watch-dog joining
in. The celestial angel has soared to heaven, scared; and yet honour,
magnanimity, devotion, filled the hearts of those who thus turned to
hell a seeming paradise. Led by Richard and De Faro, while a party was
left behind to insure retreat, another rushed forward right through the
town, to throw open the western gate, and admit Desmond, before the
terrified citizens had exchanged their nightcaps for helmets; in vain:
already the market-place was filled with soldiers ready for the
encounter; guided by a native, they endeavoured to find a way through
the bye-streets; they lost themselves; they got entangled in narrow
alleys; the awakened citizens cast upon their heads tiles, blocks of
wood,--all they could lay hands upon. To get back to the square was
their only salvation; although the storm and yell that rose behind,
assured them that Desmond had commenced the attack. With diminished
numbers York regained the market-place; here he was furiously attacked:
the crowd still increased, until the knot of assailants might have been
crushed, it seemed, by mere numbers; day, bright day, with its golden
clouds and swift-pacing sun, dawned upon the scene. In one of those
pauses which sometimes occur in the most chaotic roar, a trumpet was
heard, sounding as it seemed Desmond's retreat from the walls. Richard
felt that he was deserted, that all hope was over; and to secure the
retreat of his men was a work of sufficient difficulty. Foot to foot the
young hero and the veteran mariner fought; one by the quickness of his
blows, the other by his tower-like strength, keeping back the enemy;
while retreating slowly, their faces to the foe, they called on their
men to make good their escape. They reached the quay--they saw the wide
river, their refuge; their vessels near at hand, the boats hovering
close, their safety was in sight, and yet hope of safety died in their
hearts, so many and so fierce were those who pressed on them, Richard
was wounded, weary, faint; De Faro alone--Reginald's old tower, which,
dark and scathless, frowned on them, seemed his type. They were at the
water's edge, and the high tide kissed with its waves the very footway
of the quay: "Courage, my lord,--a few more blows and we are safe:" the
mariner spoke thus, for he saw Richard totter; and his arm, raised
feebly, fell again without a stroke. At that moment, a flame, and then a
bellowing roar, announced that the tardy cannoneer had at last opened
his battery on the fleet, from the tower. One glance De Faro cast on his
caravel; the bolt had struck and damaged one of the vessels, but the
Adalid escaped, "Courage, my lord!" again he shouted; and at that moment
a blow was struck at Richard which felled him; he lay stretched at De
Faro's feet. Ere it could be repeated, the head of the assailant was
cleft by a Moorish scimitar. With furious strength, De Faro then hurled
his weapon among the soldiers; the unexpected act made them recoil; he
lifted up the insensible form of Richard with the power of an elephant;
he cast him into the near waves, and leapt in after: raising him with
one hand, he cut the waters with the other, and swam thus towards his
vessel, pursued by a rain of missiles; one arrow glanced on Richard's
unstrung helmet, another fixed itself in the joint at the neck; but De
Faro was unhurt. He passed, swimming thus, the nearest vessels: the
sailors crowded to the sides, imploring him to enter: as if it had been
schoolboy's sport, he refused, till he reached the Adalid, till his own
men raised Richard, revived now, but feeble, to her worn deck: and he,
on board her well-known planks, felt superior to every sovereign in the
world.




CHAPTER XL

AN ESCAPE


     Farewell, Erin! farewell all
     Who live to weep our fall!

                                  MOORE.


On the height of the tower of Ardmore, the White Rose of young Richard
kept her vigils, and looked across the calm sea, and along the passes of
the mountains of Drum, in anxious expectation of the event of the
expedition. Sad forebodings oppressed her; the sentiment that mastered
every other, was that her lord should require her presence, her
assistance, while she was far. He had promised to send a post each day;
when these failed, her heart sank within her. The only change that
occurred, was when she saw the Adalid proceed slowly in the calm towards
Waterford.

One sunny morn she from her watch-tower perceived several straggling
groups descending the mountains. She strained her eyes: no banners
waved; no martial music spoke of victory. That was secondary in her
eyes; it was for Richard's safety that she was solicitous; yet she would
not, did not fear; for there is an instinctive sense in human nature
which, in time of doubt, sallies forth from the ark of refuge, and
brings back tidings of peace or sorrow to the expectant on the perilous
flood; a prophetic spirit which, when it despairs--woe the while!--the
omen proves not false. The Lady Katherine watched anxiously but not in
despair. At length heavy footsteps ascended the tower-stairs; and to
answer the beatings of her heart, Edmund Plantagenet and the mayor of
Cork presented themselves; they eagerly asked, "Is he not here?"

"Nay, he has not fled?" she replied, while for the first time she grew
pale.

"Weigh our words as mere air," said O'Water; "for we know nothing,
gentle dame, but that I must to Cork, to bar out the men of Waterford.
His highness left us for the fleet; and the filling up of those cursed
ponds of Kilbarry--ill luck to them!--cut off his return. Last
night--Saint Patrick knows the deeds of the last night!--weary from
our labour the day before, we were all too carelessly asleep, when our
camp was assaulted. Earl Maurice had ridden to Lismore to hasten his
cousin, the Knight of the Valley. There was some report of an attack
upon the town from the ships. Havoc was the cry that roused the welkin
from east to west. The sum I know not, save that we are runaways--the
siege of Waterford is raised."

"What skiff is that?" interrupted the duchess. Round the point of
Minehead first peeped the bowsprit, then the prow; and last the complete
form of a vessel in full sail, yet scarcely touched by the wind,
weathered the promontory. "Haste we, my friends," she continued; "the
duke may be on board; at least we shall have intelligence."

"I know that craft full well," said O'Water; "her captain is a converted
Moorish pagan."

"The White Rose waves from her mast-top," cried Katherine; "oh, he is
there!"

"Holy angels!" exclaimed Edmund; "it is the Adalid! I will on board on
the instant."

Already the duchess was descending the steep narrow stairs; the
villagers of Ardmore, with many of the soldiers who had fled from
Waterford, were on the shingles, watching the caravel, now full in
sight, yet fearful to venture too near the shelving shore. "They are
bound for Cork," cried a man.

"Oh, not till I first speak to them," said Katherine; "the day is fair,
the sea calm, put off a boat. Ah, my cousin Edmund, take me with thee."

Plantagenet had already got a boat from its moorings. O'Water was beside
the princess to beseech vainly that she would be patient; and poor
Astley, who had been left in special attendance on her, waited near with
blanched cheeks. Accompanied by these dear or humble friends, the White
Rose was borne with the speed of ten oars towards the Adalid. On the
deck, half reclining on a rude bed, very pale, yet with lively, wakeful
eyes, lay the prince of England. In a moment Katherine was assisted on
board. There was no death for Richard; she was there, life of his life;
so young, so beautiful, and true; the celestial goodness that beamed in
her eyes, and dimpled her cherub countenance, was not like that of an
inhalant of this sad planet; except that spirits of beauty and love ever
and anon _do_ animate the frames of the earth-born; so that we behold in
the aspects of our fellow-beings glances and smiles bright as those of
angels. De Faro himself looked with admiration on the bending form of
this lovely one, till accosted by Edmund, whose first question was, "Don
Hernan here--where then is----"

"My beloved Monina you would ask for," said De Faro; "she, who to please
her vagrant father would have crossed the wild Atlantic to visit the
savage Western Isles. Poor child, even at the threshold of this
adventure we were nearly wrecked. She is now in England; she sent me
here--to tell of rebellion against King Henry; to invite Duke Richard
to his kingdom."

Thus they were occupied on the sunny deck; the sea was calm, the keel
almost stationary in the water; they were bound for Cork; Plantagenet
and the mayor gathered eagerly from De Faro the history of the combat.
They learned that it had been expected that Desmond would have assaulted
from land, while York invaded the city from the river; but the fellow
sent with Richard's missive had been taken, the city put on her guard.
Nothing but the desire of the citizens to do too much, and his own
desperate valour, had saved Richard; they resolved at once to receive
and destroy him, and to sally unawares on the earl's camp: they hoped to
make prisoners of all the chiefs. They failed in this, but succeeded in
raising the siege of their city.

Towards evening a land-breeze sprung up, and two others of York's
vessels hove in sight, and passed them quickly; for the Adalid was much
disabled, and made slow way. Soon in pursuit appeared a ship and two
corvettes, which O'Water recognized as belonging to Waterford. The
corvettes proceeded on their way; but the larger vessel spied out the
Adalid, and, being now in advance of her, hove to, with the manifest
resolve of attacking her on her watery way towards Cork. De Faro, with
his keen eyes fixed on the enemy's movements, stood on the forecastle in
silence; while Plantagenet and O'Water eagerly demanded arms, and
exhorted the sailors to a most vain resistance. From the vessel of the
foe the Moorish mariner cast his eyes upwards; the wind was shifting to
the west. With a loud voice he shouted to his crew to man the yards;
then, seizing the rudder, gave the swift orders that made the caravel go
about. Sailing near the wind, her canvass had flapped lazily, now it
filled; the keel felt the impulse, and dashed merrily along, bounding
forward like a courser in the race; the ship, which had furled its sails
in expectation of the combat, was in an instant left far behind; the
other vessels from Waterford were still further to the west, towards
Cork.

All these manœuvres were mysteries to the landsmen: they gladly hailed
the distance placed between them and a superior enemy; but as with a
freshening gale the Adalid still held her swift course towards the east,
and the land began to sink on the horizon, O'Water asked with some
eagerness whither they were bound.

"To safety," De Faro replied, laconically.

"An idle answer," said Edmund; "we must judge where our safety lies?"

"I have ever found best safety on the wide ocean sea," cried the
mariner, looking round proudly on his beloved clement. "Your safeties
and your lords are, methinks, English born; if this wind hold, on the
third morning we shall see the coast of Cornwall."

The mayor was aghast, exclaiming--"Cornwall! England! we are betrayed?"

De Faro looked on him with contempt:--"I do not command here," he
continued, "I obey the prince of England; let him decide. Shall we
engage superior force; be boarded; taken by the enemy: or land, be
wrecked, perchance, upon this savage coast; alive with vengeful
kerns--defeated men among a victorious angry people? Or go where we are
called by your leader's cause, where thousands of men are up in arms to
receive you like brothers, to fight for you, with you; where England,
the long-desired kingdom, makes you welcome to her green, sunny shores?
Ask ye your prince this question; let his word be law."

This statement, upheld by York, brought conviction to the minds of
Plantagenet and O'Water. The latter was aware of the risk he ran from
the awakened vengeance of Henry, to pursue his having fostered rebellion
in the city of which he was magistrate; and a moment's reflection showed
him that there was no security for him, except in flight from Ireland.
Meanwhile the wind, increasing in its strength, and right astern,
carried them over the foaming waters. The early dawn showed them far at
sea: they had outrun or baffled their pursuers; and though, now and
then, with anxious thought, they reflected on the comrades left behind,
on the poor equipage, and diminished numbers with which they were about
to land in England, still there was something so miraculous in their
escape, so unforeseen in the destiny that cut them off, and carried
them, a remnant merely of the war, away from its dangers, that they felt
as if they were under the immediate direction of a ruling Providence,
and so resigned themselves; greedily drinking in the while the highly
coloured picture De Faro painted of the Yorkist army which awaited them
in Cornwall.

Again upon the sea--again impelled by winds and waves to new
scenes--new hopes, tossed here and there by Fortune, it was Richard's
fate to see one frustrated expectation give place to another, which, in
its turn, faded and died. This constant succession of projects kept
alive within him that sanguine spirit which never could be vanquished.
Eagerly he passed from one idea to another, and almost welcomed the last
disaster, which appeared but to pioneer the way to future success.
During this voyage, weak as his wounds had made him, he talked of
England as his own--the dearer because he must spend his blood to win
it. Circumstances had an exactly contrary effect upon Katherine. The
continual change of schemes convinced her of the futility of all. She
felt that, if the first appearance of the duke of York, acknowledged and
upheld by various sovereigns and dear high-born relatives, had not
animated the party of the White Hose in his favour, it was not now,
after many defeats and humiliations on his side, and after triumphs and
arrogant assumptions on that of his enemy, that brilliant success could
be expected. This conviction must soon become general among the
Yorkists, Richard would learn the sad lesson, but she was there to
deprive it of its sting; to prove to him, that tranquillity and
Katherine were of more worth than struggles, even if they proved
successful, for vain power.

It was strange that a girl of royal birth, bred in a palace, accustomed
to a queen-like sovereignty over her father's numerous vassals in the
Highlands, should aim at restricting the ambitious York to mere privacy;
while Monina, the humble daughter of a Moorish mariner, would have felt
honour, reputation, all that is dear to man, at stake, if her friend had
dreamed of renouncing his claims to the English crown. His cause was her
life; his royalty the main spring of all her actions and thoughts. She
had sacrificed love to it--she taught her woman's soul to rejoice in
his marriage with another, because his union with a princess was pledge
to the world of his truth. Perhaps, had the time ever come when he
renounced his struggles, she had felt with a pang that his lowly
fortunes might not incongruously be shared by her, and self had mingled
in the religion of her heart, which was virtuous devotion to him; but as
it was, the idea never presented itself. He must win or die. Did he win,
her happiness would result from the contemplation of his glory; were he
to die, the young hero's grave would not be watered by her tears: she
believed that in that hour her life would cease.

The Lady Katherine saw a vain mask in all the common-place pomp of
palaces; she perceived that power failed most when its end was good; she
saw that in accomplishing its purpose in the cottage, or in halls of
state, felicity resulted from the affections only. It was but being an
actor in different scenes, to be a potentate or a peasant; the outward
garb is not the livery of the mind: the refinement of taste which
enables us to gather pleasure from simple objects; the warmth of heart
which necessitates the exercise of our affections, but which is content
when they are satisfied; these, to her mind, were the only, but they
were the complete ingredients of happiness; and it was rarer to find and
more difficult to retain them, among false-hearted, ambitious courtiers,
and the luxury of palaces, than among simple-minded peasantry and a
plain natural style of living. There was some romance in this idea;
Katherine felt that there was, and subdued herself not to lay too much
store by any change or guise of outward circumstance. She taught herself
to feel and know, that in the tumult of camps and war, in the anxieties
of her present vagrant life, on the throne which she might possess, or
in the prison she might share, by devoting herself to the happiness of
him to whom she was united, whose heroism, goodness and love merited all
her affection, she was performing the part assigned to her on earth, and
securing a portion of happiness, far beyond the common lot of those
whose colder, harder natures require something beyond sympathy to
constitute their misnamed felicity.




CHAPTER XLI

ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND


     From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right.
     If I am not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused gurnet.

                                                       SHAKSPEARE.


On the deck of the sea-worn Adalid, watching the renovated strength, and
attending on the still remaining weakness of her lord, the soft heart of
the princess possessed to fulness all its desires; while Monina, among
the wild rude Cornish rebels, exerted herself to inspire zeal for his
cause, and to increase the number of his partisans, winning them by her
thrilling eloquence, ruling them by her beauty and enthusiasm. She had
found the whole population ready to second him; but fitting leaders,
noble and influential men, were absolutely wanting. She sent her father
to urge Richard to this new attempt, and when he should appear,
attended, as she fondly hoped, by a train of high-born Irish lords, of
gallant Scotch cavaliers, and devoted English warriors; he would be able
to give a martial form to the rout of Cornish insurgents, to discipline
their wild, untamed valour, to attract others by name and rank, and
Tudor at last must grow pale upon his throne. With eagerness she awaited
the fleet that was to bring the chosen band of heroes; when, after a
long and calm voyage, on the third of September, the Adalid ran into
White Sand Bay, on the western coast of Cornwall, and Plantagenet, at
Richard's command, disembarked and proceeded forthwith to Bodmin.

It was strange that the chief partizan of the White Rose should, on his
invasion of the island, find a Spanish girl the main source of
information--the chief mover of the rebellion by which he was to
profit. Yet Plantagenet almost forgot his mortal struggle for a kingdom,
in the anticipation of seeing Monina. Plantagenet, prouder, more
ambitious for his cousin than Richard for himself--Plantagenet, who had
but one object, to be the guardian, supporter, defender of York, now
wandered in thought far back through many years to their Spanish home;
to his tenderness for the sweet child of Madeline; to the development of
the beauty and virtues of the lovely Moor. Thrown apart by their several
destinies, he had scarcely seen her since then; and now, in place of the
dark, laughing-eyed girl, he beheld a woman, bright with intelligence
and sensibility; whose brow wore somewhat the sad trace of suffering,
whose cheek was a little sunk, but in whose eyes there was a soul, in
whose smile an enchantment not to be resisted. She was all life,
vivacity, and yet softness: all passion, yet yielding and docile. Her
purpose was steady, stubborn; but the mode of its attainment, her
conduct, she easily permitted to be guided. Edmund scarcely recognized
her, but she instantly knew him; her elder brother, her kind but serious
guardian, whom she had loved with awe, as the wisest and best of men.
Now he bore a dearer name, as the unfailing friend of him she loved. To
both their hearts this meeting was an unexpected joy. Monina had thought
too much of Richard to remember his cousin. He had half forgotten his
own sensations; or, at least, was quite unprepared for the power and
effect of her surpassing beauty.

After the first overflowing of affection, Monina eagerly detailed the
forces raised, and dwelt on the spirit and courage of the insurgents.
"They are poor fellows," she said, "but true; burning with zeal to right
themselves, and to avenge their losses at Blackheath. They are gathered
together by thousands. They want merely leaders, discipline, arms,
money, ammunition, and a few regular troops to show them the way: these,
of course, you bring."

"Alas! no," said Edmund, "we bring merely ourselves."

"Could Ireland, then, furnish no warlike stores?" continued the zealous
girl, "But this can be remedied, doubtless. Yourself, your leader, Lord
Desmond, Lord Barry, the gallant Neville; tell me who else--who from
Burgundy--what Irish, what Scottish knights?"

The last word was said with difficulty: it made a pause in her rapid
utterance; while Edmund, aghast, replied, "Indeed! none of all these, or
very few: in a word, we have fled from Waterford in the Adalid. His
highness and myself are the sole English knights. The good old mayor of
Cork must represent all Ireland, gentle and simple, to your eyes--our
fair duchess, Scotland: her attendants will follow in due time, but
these are but needy servitors." Monina laughed. "We came to seek, not
bring aid," continued Plantagenet, gravely.

"Do not be angry," replied Monina. "There is more bitterness and sorrow
in my laugh, than in, methinks, a widow's tears. My dear friend, God
send we are not utterly lost. Yet his highness and yourself may work
wonders. Only report truly our state, that the duke be not too
dissatisfied with our appearance. Tell him Lord Audley headed a worse
organized troop: tell him that Master Heron, the mercer, has no silken
soul--that Master Skelton, the tailor, disdains a smaller needle than a
cloth-yard shaft."

"And is it to head men like these we have been drawn from our Irish
friends?" cried Edmund; "better return. Alas! our path is besieged; the
very sea is subject to our enemy; in the wide world the king of England
has no refuge."

"That he is king of England," said Monina, "let not him, let none of us
forget. The very name is powerful: let him, on his native shores, assume
it. Surely, if their liege king stand singly in the land of his
forefathers, at his sacred name thousands will congregate. He has dared
too little, when he had power: at the worst, even now, let him dare all,
and triumph."

Her bold, impetuous language had its effects on Edmund; it echoed his
own master passion, which ever cried aloud, "He is a king! and, once
give himself that sacred name, submission and allegiance from his
subjects must follow." Buoyed up by these thoughts, his report on board
the Adalid was free from those humiliating details, which, even if he
had wished, he would have found no voice to communicate to his royal
cousin.

Monina's task of imparting to her friends the destitute condition in
which their sovereign arrived, was even easier. "He is come among tall
men," said the pompous Heron, "who can uphold him for the better king,
even to the satin of his doublet."

"And fight for him, even to the rending of our own," cried Skelton.

"And die for him, as he must too, when all's done," said Trereife. "A
soldier's death is better than a dastard's life."

"We will have our men in goodly array," said Heron. "Master Skelton, are
the doublets cut from that piece of sad-coloured velvet, last of my
wares, slashed with white, as I directed?"

"Slash me no doublets but with a Spanish rapier," squeaked Skelton,
"Have I not cast away the shears? Yet, look you now, good lack! I lie.
Here in my pouch be a sharp pair, to clip Master Walter of Hornbeck's
ears--if, by the help of the saints, we can lay him as flat on the
field as his own grey suit was on my board when a shaping; by the same
token that he never paid for it."

"In good hour, Sir Taylor," said Monina: "but the talk now is, how duly
to receive his grace, how induce him to accept your aid."

"Ay, by Saint Dunstan!" cried Trereife, "he has ruffled in France and
Burgundy, my masters, and will look on you as clowns and base-born
burghers; but no man has more to give than his life, and if he waste
that heartily, time was, and time may be, when villains trod on the
necks of knights, as the ghost of Charles of Burgundy could tell us.
Courage is the beginning and end of a soldier's catechism."

Such were the chiefs Monina found desirous, and in their own conceit
capable, of placing England's diadem on Duke Richard's head. Heron, the
bankrupt mercer, who fancied himself the base-born offspring of the late
earl of Devonshire, and whose first deed of arms would find him Heron no
more, but Sir John Courtney; Skelton, a luckless wight, whose shears
ever went astray (the true cause why Walter of Hornbeck paid not for his
misshapen suit), and who, therefore, believed himself born for greater
things; and Trereife, the younger prodigal son of a rural Franklin, who,
cast off and disinherited, had served in the wars in Flanders, gaining
in that country no small reverence for the good Duchess Margaret, and
ready therefore to right her nephew; besides, like a true hero, he
abhorred this silken time of peace, and hoped to gather spoil, if not
laurels, in the meditated insurrection.

The noble passengers disembarked from the Adalid. "Welcome to England,
sweet Kate! welcome to the country of which thou art queen," said York;
"and even if her reception be cold or rough, love her for my sake, for
she is my mother."

"A stepmother I will not call her, dear my lord," replied the princess,
"but the maternal embrace is strangely wanting on these deserted sands:
the narrow deck of yonder caravel, were, methinks, a kindlier home: may
we go on and prosper; but, if we fail, my lord will pardon me, if I
welcome the day when I embark again on board the Adalid; to find, when
the wide earth proves false, safety and happiness on the free waves of
ocean."




CHAPTER XLII

RECEPTION IN CORNWALL


SKELTON. 'Tis but going to sea, and, leaping ashore, cut ten or twelve
thousand unnecessary throats, fire seven or eight towns, take half a
dozen cities, get into the market-place, crown him. Richard the Fourth,
and the business is finished.

                                             FORD.


                              Am I not king?
     Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
     Is not the king's name forty thousand names?

                                             SHAKSPEARE.


These doughty leaders drew out their followers in a plain just without
Bodmin. There were about two hundred men decently clad from the remnants
of the mercer's wares, tolerably well armed and disciplined by Trereife;
this troop obtained the distinction of being selected as King Richard's
body-guard. Skelton was their captain, a rare commander, whose real
merit was that he felt happiest when stuck close as a burr to Trereife;
for at heart he was an arrant coward, though a loud braggart, and talked
of slaying his thousands, while the very wounding of his doublet had
made him wince.

Heron was brave in his way; a true Cornishman, he could wrestle and cast
his antagonist with the strength of a lion; he loved better, it is true,
to trust to his arm than to his sword, which, in spite of his strength,
Trereife always made fly from his hand in their fencing lessons; not the
less did he consider himself a gallant knight, and had cut up many a
yard of crimson cramoisy to make a rich suit for himself. He wore
Monina's glove in his cap and large yellow roses at his knees; he called
himself generalissimo, and marshalled under him full three thousand men,
who in truth had


           Never set a squadron in the field
     Nor the division of a battle knew
     More than a spinster;


but they were sturdy discontented spirits, who valued life at its worth,
which was even nothing to them, who had laboured with all their hearts,
till labour was of no avail, and who then left the mine and the furrow
to carry their loud complaints to the foot of Henry's throne--they were
better pleased with the prospect of overthrowing it.

"Now, my masters, make yourselves heard," cried Heron, as he shuffled
down a little eminence on a short-legged Welsh pony, the only steed he
found he could back in safety. "His grace is within ear-shot, so you be
loud. Long life to King Richard!--down with the taxes--Saint Michael
and Cornwall for ever!"

The din was prolonged, ended, began, went on, as the prince arrived at
the summit of the hill with his little train--fair Katherine was at his
side--Plantagenet, O'Water, De Faro, with some dozen soldiers who fled
from Waterford; sure never invader came so ill equipped. On the hill-top
the illustrious wanderers paused, Richard hastily scanned the
rough-suited multitude--then, turning to Plantagenet, "Cousin," he
said, "you told me that the insurgent army would be drawn out for my
view; is it not strange that yonder rabble should hide it from us? As
far as my eye can reach, I see no martial discipline, no banners, no
lordly crest; fie on those drums! they have no touch of military
concord. What makes our army so slack of duty, cousin?"

Though no fault of his, Edmund blushed deeply in very shame--the
approach of Heron, Skelton, Trereife, and three or four other principal
rebels, cut off his reply. It had been agreed that Skelton, who had a
gift of eloquence, should speak, and many words he used to welcome his
liege. "We will have every man with a red rose in his cap, in a drag
chain, please your grace, and give a sound lesson to the saucy burghers
of Exeter withal. Not a knight shall live in the land, but of your
majesty's dubbing. We have but to put to rout King Henry's army, to hang
the false loon for a traitor, and to set fire to London and the
Parliament. Such nobles as please to doff their silken cloaks, and don
miners' jackets, may work, the rest shall hang. Their mere wardrobes,
bless the day! will find us and your grace in cloth of gold, embroidery,
and other rich garniture to the end of our lives."

"We thank your zeal, my worthy master," said Richard, courteously; "if
our good troops do half your saying, King Henry must look to it."

"Are those men to be worse than their word?" cried Skelton. "There is
not one among us but has the arms of ten. We are of a race of giants,
please your majesty, and could knock the walls of Exeter down with, our
fists. Please you to enter Bodmin, whose very stones will cry for King
Richard louder than King Hal's cannon;--to-morrow, God willing, we are
for the wars."

The royal party passed on--the dark ferocity or sturdy obstinacy
painted on the faces of the ill-armed rout, struck Richard as he
passed--he became meditative, while Edmund, shamed and angry, his
cheeks burning, his eyes on the ground, listened in indignant silence to
Master Skelton, who fastened on him with such talk, that whether a
soldier spoke of killing doublets, or a tailor prattled of fashioning a
field of slaughter, was a riddle ill to be devised. At length they
passed the gates of Bodmin; and here was a louder cry of welcome from
the shrill voices of women, who held up their thin hands and
half-starved children, crying for vengeance on Tudor, blessing the sweet
faces of Richard and his lovely wife. York's eyes flashed again with
their wonted fires; his creative spirit had found materials here to work
some project, all poor and rude as they might seem.

They entered the town-hall; when, by some sudden revulsion, in the tide
of the crowd, every Cornishman fell back, closed the doors, and left the
wanderers alone. Something was forgotten surely; for Heron had paced
pompously up to Richard, when suddenly he turned on his heel, crying, "A
word, my masters!" and all were gone. The Lady Katherine had marked
their backing and hurrying with becoming gravity; but, when the door was
fairly shut, she could restrain no longer a heartfelt laugh. Richard
joined in her mirth, while Plantagenet strode through the hall angrily;
muttering, "an army, a rout of shirtless beggars; is this England's
reception for her king?"

"It were fine mumming," said Richard, "under a hedge with the green
sward for a stage."

"By our Lady, this passes patience!" reiterated Edmund; "where are the
gentlemen of England? Where the sons of those who fell for York? Are we
to oppose these half-naked knaves to the chivalry of Henry?"

"It would seem that such is expected," replied the prince; "and, verily,
cousin, we might do worse. I pray you, treat the honest rogues well;
better may come of it; keep we our secret, and have we not an array?"

"My lord!" cried Plantagenet, in wonder.

"Patience, dear friend," said York; "I have not been apprentice to
adversity so many long years, without becoming an adept in my calling. I
say, I have an army; bold, though poor--ragged truly, but exceeding
faithful. Methinks it were more glorious to put Tudor down with such
small means, than to meet him in equal terms, like a vulgar conqueror. I
do beseech you, Edmund, put a good face on it; speak to our Cornish
giants, as if they had souls of mettle, and bodies decked like Ponce de
Leon and his peers, when they welcomed Queen Isabel to the Spanish camp.
You remember the golden array of the knights, cousin?"

Edmund was impatient of the prince's gay humour; while Katherine, seeing
in his bright eyes heroism and lofty resolve, felt a dewy moisture
gather in her own: there is something at once awful and affecting, when
a man, the sport of fortune, meets her rudest blow unshrinking, and
turns her very spite into arms against herself. The whole secret of
Richard's present thoughts she could not divine, but she saw that their
scope was worthy of his birth, his aim: her respect--her love
augmented; and her gentle heart at that moment renewed its vow to devote
herself to him entirely and for ever.

In the same spirit, York answered the deputation that waited on him. He
commanded a proclamation to be made, in which he assumed the title of
Richard the Fourth. He announced his intention of immediately
penetrating England, and seizing on some walled town or city, before
Henry could be aware of his having landed. Nor did he confine his energy
to words; he examined the state of his men; their arms and furniture; he
provided for their better discipline, and animated his cousin to take an
active part in marshalling them to order. He went among them, learned
the causes of their dissatisfaction, promised them better days, and so
raised a glad spirit in them, that their hearts, overleaping both time
and circumstance, paid him the honour and the love he might have
claimed, had he already led them through fertile England, and planted
his victorious standard on the Tower of London. Trereife swore by his
beard, he was a proper youth; the old soldier awoke to the remembrance
of harvests of spoil he had gathered in the Netherlands, the stern
encounters and the joys of success; he gazed on the rough Cornish men,
and wondered how they should withstand the nobility of England: but,
when Richard glanced hope and triumph from his bright eyes, when he
spoke of the omnipotence of resolved valour, when he drew a picture of
their ghastly poverty, and showed them how, by standing firm merely,
they might redeem themselves;--while the poor fellows answered with a
prolonged shout, or better still, grasped their arms more fiercely, and
trod the earth with free and decided steps;--a thousand facilities
seemed to be discovered; a thousand resources for the war displayed,
undreamt of before. Were these mere words? or at his voice did soldiers
rise from the clods, and victory obey the sound?

Plantagenet, seeing his royal cousin's resolve, strove to second it.
With a party of men he assaulted a near fortress, carried it, and seized
on a store of arms. This success looked like a mighty victory; Richard
exalted it as such; and the very fellows who handled awkwardly their
booty, fancied themselves heroes at the mere sight of it.

On the third day they were to proceed to Exeter, it being determined
that they should besiege this city. De Faro offered to sail to Cork to
invite the warlike chieftains of Munster to come over with their power;
and at least himself to bring back in the Adalid, Neville, and the rest
of the English exiles. While Edmund, who looked glad at the thought,
counselled that they should entrench themselves in this corner of
England, which was so entirely devoted to them, till these forces were
added to their number, and till by discipline, they should have made
regular troops of the rabble, by courtesy ycleped an army.

"Wherefore, cousin," asked Richard, "do you desire others to share in
our disasters?"

"My lord!" cried Edmund, astounded.

"I have but one wish," continued the prince, "that you and my good
O'Water were even now in Ireland; so that I might stand the brunt of
this war alone. You look amazed. Yet it were more amazing if I expected
to do battle against the Veres, the Howards, the Berkeleys, the
Courtneys, and ten thousand other names of high renown, backed by their
train of martial adherents, with ragged regiments like those we are
about to lead to the field;--even though the kerns of Ireland made
their number double, and the Geraldines, Barry and Neville added by
their nobleness dignity to our victor's conquest. Remember Stoke, my
cousin Edmund; you may well remember it. Remember my honoured kinsman
the earl of Lincoln and my lamented Lovel. Ah! that I did not now peril
your life, then spared!"

"Yet, if your grace fight at all," said O'Water, bluntly; "methinks we
were not the worse for being better appointed for the fray. For victims,
even those poor honest varlets are too many."

"That one other life should be wasted for me," replied Richard,
fervently, "is my saddest thought. I fear it must be so; some few lives,
each as dear to him that spends it, as is the life-blood to our own
hearts, I can say no more. I have a secret purpose, I confess, in all I
do. To accomplish it--and I do believe it to be a just one--I must
strike one blow; nor fail. Tudor is yet unprepared; Exeter vacant of
garrison; with stout hearts for the work, I trust to be able to seize
that city. There the wars of York shall end. So far I confide in your
discretions, that you may not deem me mad. More is the single property
of my own soul. Will you help me so far, dear friends--so far hazard
life--not to conquer a kingdom for Richard, but to redeem his honour?"

The warm-hearted, grey-headed Irish O'Water, with gushing eyes, swore to
adhere to him the last.

Edmund replied, "I am but a bit of thee; deal with me as with thyself;
and I know thou wilt be no niggard in giving me away to danger."

De Faro cried, "I am a sailor, and know better how to face death on the
waves than victory on shore; but, Santiago! may our blessed Lady herself
look shy on me at the great day, if the mariner of the wreck prove false
to your grace."

"Now then to our work," cried York, "to speak fair to my faithful
fellows and their braggart leaders. They at least shall be winners in
our game; for my hand is on my prize; a spirit has whispered success to
me; my hope and its consummation are married even at their birth."




CHAPTER XLIII

MISGIVINGS


               Dost thou hear, lady?
     If from the field I shall return once more
     To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood;
     I and my sword will earn our chronicle;
     There is hope in it yet.

                                        SHAKSPEARE.


Richard was obliged to plead his cause yet once again. Katherine had
watched all his movements; she had eyed curiously the army he mustered
to the field: she talked to its leaders, and while they vaunted her
affability, she was diving with earnest mind, into the truth of things.
No fear that it could be hid from her; love for Richard was the bright
light that dispelled every deceptive shadow from the scene. She saw the
bare reality; some three thousand poor peasants and mechanics, whose
swords were more apt to cut themselves than strike the enemy, were
arrayed against the whole power and majesty of England. On the morrow
they were to set forward. That night, while at the casement of his rude
chamber, Richard gazed upon the congregated stars, trying to decipher in
their intricate bright tracery the sure omen of the good he was told
they charactered for him, Katherine, after a moment's hesitation, with a
quivering voice, and hand that shook as it pressed his, knelt on a
cushion at his feet, saying, "My sweet Richard, hear me; hear your
faithful friend--your true wife; call not my councils weak and
feminine, but weigh them sagely ere you resolve. May I speak?"

"Lady of my heart, arise," said Richard; "I speak, my soft-voiced
Katherine--my White Rose of beauty--fair flower, crowning York's
withered tree. Has not God done all in giving you to me? yet we must
part, love, for a while. Your soldier is for the wars, Kate, while you
sit in your bower, weaving victorious garlands for his return."

"My ever dear lord," said Katherine, "I speak with fear, because I feel
that I shall not address myself to your concealed thought. I do not wish
to penetrate your secrets, and yet I tremble at their event. You have
not so far deceived yourself as to imagine, that with these unfortunate
men you can ride over the pride and the power of this island; did I see
on what else you founded the lofty hope, that has, since we came here,
beamed in your eyes, I would resign myself to your better wisdom. But,
wherever I turn my view, there is a blank. You do not dream of conquest,
though you feel secure of victory. What can this mean, save that you see
glory in death?"

"You are too quick-sighted, sweet Kate," said Richard, "and see beyond
the mark. I do not set my cast upon falling in this fray; though it may
well happen that I should: but I have another aim."

"Without guessing at what that may be," replied the lady, "since you
seem desirous to withhold the knowledge, permit me to present another
object to your choice; decide between them, and I submit: but do not
carelessly turn from mine. There is all to lose, nought to win, in what
you now do. Death may blot the future page, so that we read neither
disgrace nor prison in its sad lines; but wherefore risk to die. While
yet, dear love, we are young, life has a thousand charms, and one may be
the miserable survivor, whose heart now bleeds at the mere surmise."

She faltered; he kissed her soft cheek, and pressed her to his heart.
"Why may we not--why should we not live?" continued Katherine; "what is
there in the name or state of king that should so take captive our
thoughts, that we can imagine no life but on a throne? Believe me,
careful nights and thorny days are the portion of a monarch: he is
lifted to that awful height only to view more clearly destruction
beneath; around, fear, hate, disloyalty, all yelling at him. The cold,
heartless Tudor may well desire the prize, for he has nothing save the
gilt crown to ennoble him; nothing but the supple knees of courtiers to
present to him the show of love. But--ah! could I put fire into my weak
words--my heart's zeal into my supplicatory voice--persuasion would
attend upon me, and you would feel that to the young, to two united as
we are, our best kingdom is each other's hearts; our dearest power that
which each, without let or envy, exercises over the other. Though our
palace-roof be the rafters of a lowly cot, our state, the dear affection
we bear each other, our attendants the duty and observance of one to the
other--I, so served by King Edward's son--you, by the rightful queen
of this fair island--were better waited on than Henry and Elizabeth, by
their less noble servitors. I almost think that, with words like these,
I might draw you from the uneasy throne to the downy paradise of love;
and can I not from this hard struggle, while death yet guards the
palace-gate, and you will be pierced through and through long ere you
can enter."

"Thus, my gentle love," said Richard, "you would have me renounce my
birth and name; you desire that we become the scorn of the world, and
would be content that, so dishonoured, the braggart impostor, and his
dame Katherine, should spend their shameful days in an ignominious
sloth, misnamed tranquillity. I am a king, lady, though no holy oil nor
jewelled crown has touched this head; and such I must prove myself."

"Oh, doubt it not," she replied, "it is proved by your own speech and
your own nobleness; my heart approves you such; the whole earth, till
its latest day, will avouch that the lord of Katherine is no deceiver;
but my words avail not with you."

"They do avail, my best, my angel girl, to show me that the world's
treasure is mere dross compared with thee: one only thing I prize, not
as thy equal, but as that without which, I were a casket not even worthy
to encase this jewel of the earth--my honour! A word taught me by my
victim brother, by my noble cousin Lincoln, by the generous Plantagenet;
I learnt its meaning among a race of heroes--the Christian
cavaliers--the Moorish chivalry of Spain; dear is it to me, since
without it I would not partake your home of love--a home, more glorious
and more blessed than the throne of the universe. It is for that I now
fight, Katherine, not for a kingdom; which, as thy royal cousin truly
said, never will be mine. If I fall, that cousin, the great, the
munificent James, will be your refuge."

"Never," interrupted the lady. "Scotland I shall never see again; never
show myself a queen and no queen, the mock of their rude speech; never
put myself into my dear, but ambitious father's hands, to be bartered
away to another than my Richard; rather with your aunt of Burgundy,
rather in Tudor's own court, with your fair sister. Holy angels! of what
do I speak? how frightfully distinct has the bereft world spread itself
out as my widowed abode!"

A gush of tears closed her speech. "Think of brighter days, my love,"
said Richard, "they will be ours. You spoke erewhile of the difficulty
of giving true imagery to the living thought; thus, I know not how to
shape an appropriate garb (to use a trope of my friend Skelton) for my
inmost thoughts. I feel sure of success. I feel, that in giving up every
prospect of acquiring my birthright, I make the due oblation to Fortune,
and that she will bestow the rest--that rest is to rescue my name from
the foul slur Henry has cast on it; to establish myself as myself in the
eyes of England; and then to solicit your patience in our
calamity--your truth and love as the only sceptre and globe this hand
will ever grasp. In my own Spain, among the orange and myrtle groves,
the flowery plains and sun-lit hills of Andalusia, we will live
unambitious, yet more fortunate than crowned emperors."

With such words and promises he soothed her fears; to the word honour
she had no reply. Yet it was a mere word here; in this case, a barren
word, on which her life and happiness were to be wrecked.

The prince and Monina had met with undisguised delight. No Clifford
would now dare traduce her; she need not banish herself from countries
where his name enriched the speech of all men; nor even from that which,
invited by her, he had come to conquer. He was glad to be able to extend
his zealous fraternal protection over her, to feel that he might guard
her through life, despite of the fortune that divided them. He obtained
for her the Lady Katherine's regard, which she sought opportunities to
demonstrate, while they were avoided by Monina, who honoured and loved
her as Richard's wife and dearest friend, yet made occasion to absent
herself from both. Nothing beautiful could be so unlike as these two
fair ones. Katherine was the incarnate image of loveliness, such as it
might have been conceived by an angelic nature; noble, soft, equable
from her tender care not to displease others; in spite of the ills of
fate, gay, because self-satisfied and resigned; the bright side of
things was that which she contemplated: the bright and the
tranquil--although the hazards run by him she loved, at this period
informed her thoughts with terror. Monina--no, there was no evil in
Monina; if too much self-devotion, too passionate an attachment to one
dear idea, too enthusiastic an adoration of one exalted being, could be
called aught but virtue. The full orbs of her dark eyes, once flashing
bright, were now more serious, more melancholy; her very smile would
make you weep; her vivacity, all concentred in one object, forgot to
spend itself on trifles; yet, while the princess wept that Richard
should encounter fruitless danger for a mistaken aim, gladness sat on
Monina's brow: "He goes to conquer; God will give victory to the right:
as a warrior he treads his native land; as a monarch he will rule over
her. The very name of king he bears will shame the lukewarm English;
they will gather round the apparent sun, now that he shows himself
unclouded, leaving the false light, Tudor, to flicker into its native
nothingness."

"Monina," said the prince, "you in the wide world can bestow richest
largess on the beggar. King Richard." She looked on him in wonder. "I go
to conquer or to die: this, lovely one, is no new language for you; a
warrior's friend must hear such words unflinching. I die without a fear
if you take one charge upon you." Her beaming, expressive eyes replied
to him. He continued: "The Adalid and safety are images most firmly
united in my mind; if I cannot find security on board of her myself, let
those dear to me inherit my possession there. The hardest thought that I
bear with me, is that my fair queen should become captive to my
base-minded foe. May I not trust that if I fall, the Adalid will be her
home and refuge to convey her to her native country, or any whither she
may direct? I intrust this charge to you, my sister, my far more than
sister, my own kind Monina. You will forget yourself in that fateful
hour, to fulfil my latest wish?"

"My prince," she replied, "your words were cruel, did I not know that
you speak in over-care, and not from the impulse of your heart. In the
same spirit, I promise that your desire shall be accomplished: if you
fall, my father will protect--die for my lady the queen. But why speak
these ill-omened words? You will succeed; you will hasten the lagging
hand of Fate, and dethrone one never born to reign, to bestow on England
its rightful king. The stars promise this in their resplendent,
unfailing scrowl--the time-worn student in his lore has proclaimed
it--the sacred name of monarch which you bear is the pledge and
assurance of predestined victory."

"And you, meanwhile, will stay, and assure Katherine's destiny?"

"My dear lord, I have a task to accomplish. If I leave her grace, it is
because all spirits of good and power watch over her, and my weak
support is needed elsewhere. I am bound for London."

They parted thus. The temerity of their designs sometimes inspired them
with awe; but more usually animated them to loftier hopes. When the
thickening shadows of "coming events" clouded their spirits, they took
refuge in the sun-bright imaginations which painted to each the
accomplishment of their several hopes. Monina felt assured that the hour
of victory was at hand. Richard looked forward to a mortal struggle, to
be crowned with success: a few short weeks or briefer days would close
the long account: his word redeemed, his honour avenged, he looked
forward to his dear reward: not a sceptre--that was a plaything fit for
Henry's hand; but to a life of peace and love; a very eternity of sober,
waking bliss, to be passed with her he idolized, in the sunny clime of
his regretted Spain.




CHAPTER XLIV

A CHALLENGE


             Oh, that stern, unbending man!
     In this unhappy marriage what have I
     Not suffered--not endured!

                             SCHILLER'S WALLENSTEIN.


     Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,
     Or close the wall up with our English dead!

                                             SHAKSPEARE.


The lapse of years had confirmed Henry on his throne. He was
extortionate and severe, it is true; and thus revolts had been frequent
during the earlier portion of his reign; but they took their rise in a
class which, even in modern days, it is difficult to keep within the
boundaries of law. The peasantry, scattered and dependent on the nobles,
were tranquil: but artificers, such as the miners of Cornwall, who met
in numbers, and could ask each other, "Why, while there is plenty in the
land, should we and our children starve? Why pay our hard earnings into
the regal coffers?" and, still increasing in boldness, demand at last,
"Why should these men govern us?"


     "We are many--they are few!"


Thus sedition sprung from despair, and assumed arms; to which Henry had
many engines to oppose, bulwarks of his power. A commercial spirit had
sprung up during his reign, partly arising from the progress of
civilization, and partly from so large a portion of the ancient nobility
having perished in the civil wars. The spirit of chivalry, which
isolates men, had given place to that of trade, which unites them in
bodies.

Among these the White Rose of England had not a single partizan--the
nobles who once had upheld the house of York were few; they had for the
last eight years been intent upon restoring their fortunes, and were
wholly disinclined to the endangering them afresh for a stranger youth.
When Fitzwater, Stanley, and their numerous fellow-conspirators and
fellow-victims, sided with the duke of York, nearly all England
entertained a timid belief in his identity with lung Edward's lost
son--but those times were changed. Many were glad to soothe their
consciences by declaring him an impostor; many so desired to curry
favour with Henry; a still greater number either feared to say their
thought, or were averse to disturb the tranquillity of their country by
a contest which could benefit one man alone, and which must entail on
them another war like that so lately ended. Abroad, in France, Burgundy,
and Scotland, the prince might be discountenanced from political
motives; but he was treated with respect, and spoken of as being the man
he named himself: in England it was otherwise--contempt followed hard
upon fear, giving birth to derision, the best weapon against the
unhappy, which Henry well knew how to wield. He had two motives in
this--one was, that by affixing disgrace and scorn to his adversary, he
took away the glitter of his cause, and deterred the young and ambitious
from any desire to share in his obloquy. The other was a feeling
deeper-rooted in his mind--an intense hatred of the house of York--an
exultation in its overthrow and disgrace--a gloating over every
circumstance that blotted it with ignominy. If Richard had really been
an impostor, Henry had not used half the pains to stigmatize him as
low-born--to blast his pride with nicknames, nor have looked forward
with the joy he now did, to having him in his power--to the
degradation--the mortal stain of infamy he intended to taint him with
for ever.

Secure in power--fearless of the result, Henry heard with unfeigned joy
that his young rival had landed in England, and was advancing into the
interior of the island, at the head of the Cornish insurgents. He
himself announced the rising to his nobles. Laughing, he said, "I have
tidings for you, gentlemen, a flight of wild geese clad in eagles'
feathers, are ready to pounce upon us. Even now they hover over our good
city of Exeter, frighting the honest burghers with their dissonance."

"Blackheath will witness another victory," said Lord Oxford.

"And my kitchen receive a new scullion," replied the king; "since
Lambert Simnel became falconer, our roast meat thinks itself dishonoured
at not being spitted by a pretender to my crown; for no Audley heads
these fellows, but the king of Rakehells himself, the most noble Perkin,
who, to grace the more the unwashed rogues, calls himself Richard the
Fourth for the nonce. I have fair hope to see his majesty this bout, if
he whiz not away in a fog, or sink underground like Lord Lovel, to the
disappointment of all merry fellows who love new masks and gaudy
mumming."

"Please your majesty," said the young Lord William Courtney, "it is for
the honour of our house that not a stone of Exeter be harmed. With your
good leave, my father and myself will gather in haste what force we may:
if fortune aid us, we may present your grace with your new servitor."

"Be it so, my lord," replied the king, "and use good despatch. We
ourselves will not tarry: so that, with less harm to all, we may tread
out these hasty lighted embers. Above all, let not Duke Perkin escape;
it is my dearest wish that he partake our hospitality."

"Yes," so ran Henry's private thoughts; "he must be mine, mine alive,
mine to deal with as I list." With even more care than he put in the
mustering his army, he ordered that the whole of the southern sea-coast
of England should be guarded; every paltry fishing village had its
garrison, which permitted no boat to put off to sea, nor any to land,
without the strictest investigation; not content with this, he committed
it to the care of his baser favourites to forge some plot which might
betray his enemy without a blow into his hands.

"Give me your benison, good Bess," said the monarch, with unwonted
gaiety of manner; "with daylight I depart on the ungentle errand of
encountering your brother Perkin."

Elizabeth, not less timid than she had ever been, was alarmed by his
show of mirth, and by this appellation bestowed on one she knew to be so
near of kin. That very morning she had seen Monina--the enthusiastic
Monina, who, confiding in her royal friend's success, visited London to
watch over the fate of Elizabeth and her children. The queen smiled at
her offers of service; she felt that no such army could endanger Henry's
reign; but she feared for Richard, for her ill-fated brother, who had
now entered the net, for whom she felt assured there was no escape.
Trembling at her own boldness, she answered the king, "Whoever he may
be, you will not destroy him in cold blood?"

"You would have me spare the impostor?" asked Henry. "Spare him who
claims your son's throne? By Our Lady of Walsingham, the maternal
virtues of the daughter of York deserve high praise."

Elizabeth, dreading more to offend, horror-struck at the idea that her
husband should shed her brother's blood, burst into tears. "Silly girl,"
said Henry, "I am not angry; nay, more, I grant your prayer. Perkin, if
not slain by a chance blow, shall live. My word is passed, trust to it;
I neither inquire nor care whether he be the godson or the base brat of
the libertine Edward. In either case, my revenge stoops not so low as
his paltry life: does this content you?"

"May the saints bless your grace," said Elizabeth, "you have eased my
every fear."

"Remember then that you prove no ingrate," continued the king, "no dupe
of report, no traducer of your children's birth. Betray no interest in
the knave's downfall, save as he is my enemy. If you display any emotion
that awakens a doubt that this canker rose be aught in your eyes except
a base pretender--if you mark any feeling but stern contempt for one so
vile--tremble. My vengeance will fall on him; and his blood be on your
head."

"Magnanimous prince!" thought Elizabeth, in bitter scorn, when he had
left her: "this is your mercy. You fear! My poor Richard--your sister,
a monarch's daughter, is finely taught by this earl's son. But you will
live; then let him do his worst: the queen of England is not quite a
slave; if Henry can bind, Elizabeth may loose; and the duke of York
laugh in another land at the malice of his enemy."

We return to this prince, whose lofty spirit was sustained by an aim, an
object dearer than a kingdom in his eyes. He arrived before Exeter at
the head of seven thousand men. All the discontented in Cornwall and
Devonshire joined him. Some of these were younger brothers; some
men-at-arms who repined at peace; chiefly they were needy, oppressed
men, roused by a sense of wrong, as destitute, but not so hardy as the
kerns of Ireland. Still they were many, they were valiant; Exeter was
ungarrisoned, unprepared for defence, and there was a possibility that
by sudden assault, he might possess himself of the town. With this
intent he did not allow his troops time to repose, but at once set on
for the attack, endeavouring to scale the lofty walls; unaided by any
fitting machinery, scarcely possessed of a single scaling ladder, he was
driven back with loss. Foiled, but not vanquished, for his heart was set
upon this prize, for three days, though unpossessed of artillery or any
warlike engine, he exerted his utmost force to win the city; he
contrived rude machinery to cast stones, he planted the ladders himself,
he multiplied himself to appear everywhere, flattering, encouraging,
leading his troops again and again to the assault. When they found the
walls impregnable, he made an attempt on the gates; with fascines and
hewed trees he set one of them on fire; his men shouted as they heard
the stout oak crackle, and saw it split and crumble, offering a large
opening; but the citizens, made desperate, fearful of the ravages this
untamed multitude might commit, were true to themselves; they resisted
fire by fire, keeping up a fierce blaze within, till with piles of brick
and rubbish they had blocked the passage. Richard saw his last hope
fail. "This is not the work of the burghers," he cried, "a soldier's
skill is here."

"True as my old yard measure!" cried Heron. "It was but last night that
my cousin, the earl of Devon, clambered into the city; he came to the
northern wall, where Skelton keeps watch; when my valiant tailor heard
the noise, he ran to look for Master Trereife, who, poor fellow, lies
cold within the moat. The citizens heard and answered my cousin the
earl's call; but they were too frightened to let light through the
keyhole of a postern; and his lordship, God save him! was obliged to
climb the battlements."

"Climb the battlements, noble captain?" said Richard; "that is, a ladder
was let down!"

"It was a stone ladder he scaled, my liege," said Heron; "your grace may
walk up the same. It will scarce budge, seeing that it is the old part
of the wall itself."

"Who knows more of this?" asked the prince.

"I saw the whole," said Skelton; "That is the end. Master Trereife was
dead for the nonce, so I came back to lead my men to the fray. There was
the earl, perched like a crow, on the boughs of an old thorn-bush that
grows at the top of the wall. Surely he must have torn his cloak, for
the place is thick with all manner of weeds, and rough stones, and
brambles. But more than his broadcloth got a hole; for Clim of
Tregothius handled his bow, and let fly a cloth-yard shaft, which was
sticking in his shoulder as he got down the other side."

While the tailor talked, Richard was proceeding hastily to the spot. It
looked tranquil. The old crumbling wall was green with rank grass and
tangled weeds. He drew nearer, and then a whole shower of arrows was
discharged against him. The earl had expected that his success would
excite their curiosity, and prepared for them, with not the less zeal on
account of his own wound. Richard escaped unhurt; but Edmund, who was
scantily armed, received an arrow in his side--he fell. That same hour
tidings came of the advance of King Henry at the head of a formidable
army.

Plantagenet's wound was dressed; it showed signs of danger, and quite
disabled him. "My faithful fellows swear to preserve you in safety,
cousin," said Richard; "I must leave you."

"Do you retreat?" asked Edmund.

"No, by my soul! Truly, my hopes have somewhat quailed; yet it is but a
lucky blow, and I gain all. I leave you, my friend; but I will not leave
you in doubt and ignorance. Read this paper: it is to enforce its
contents--to oblige my haughty foe to lay aside his worst weapon,
detraction, that I, against all probability and wisdom, will urge my
cause to the last. My kingdom, it is his; my honour he must restore, and
I cry him quits. Now you have my secret. Pardon for my poor fellows;
pardon, and some alleviation of their cruel lot. For myself, as you will
find, I ask little, but I must show no fear, no retreating, to obtain
even that. I march forwards, then, towards Taunton: it is a less place
than Exeter. The smallest secure port gained, and Henry may grant my
boon."

Plantagenet unfolded the paper, and read these words:--


"Richard, legitimate and true son of Edward the Fourth, king of England
and France, and lord of Ireland, to Henry, the reigning sovereign of
these realms. In my infancy I was made a prisoner by a usurping uncle,
escaping from his thrall by aid of the most noble earl of Lincoln. This
uncle, this usurper, you conquered, and seized upon his crown. You claim
the same by right of Bolingbroke, and strengthen your title through your
union with my sister, the Lady Elizabeth. I am poor, and an
outcast--you a king. God has destroyed my house, and I submit. But I
will not submit to the vile slander that takes from me my name, and
brands me a dishonoured man.

"Henry of Richmond, I neither admit nor combat your claim to the crown.
Lancaster has many partisans, and the victory is yours. But as duke of
York, I challenge and defy you. I call on you, either by person or by
champion, to meet me in the lists, that I may defend my honour and
maintain the right. Let us spare the people's blood. In single combat
let my pretensions be set at issue; and my good sword shall cut to
pieces the wicked lies and base traditions you have calumniously and
falsely forged to my disgrace.

"Body to body, I will meet you or your champion. Name the day, the hour,
and the place. With my lance and my sword, to the death I will maintain
my birth. If I fall, I ask that my wife, the Lady Katherine Gordon, be
permitted to return to her royal cousin, James of Scotland; that such of
my followers as desire it, may be allowed to go beyond seas; that those
of your subjects, who, goaded into rebellion by your exactions, have
taken up arms, receive free pardon and remission of their imposts. If I
conquer, I add but one other demand--that you confess to the wide world
how foully you have slandered me; revoke the lies you have published,
and acknowledge me to all men, the rightful duke of York.

"If you deny my just demands, be the blood spilt in defence of my honour
on your head; England ravaged, your towns destroyed, your realm subject
to all the calamities of war; these evils rest with you. I will not
sheathe my sword, nor tread one backward step in my undertaking; but as
in the lists, so on the dread battle-field, meet your abettors, and
conquer or die in defence of my name. Expecting a fitting answer to this
just defiance, I bid you heartily farewell.

                                                     "RICHARD.

"Written under the walls of Exeter, this twelfth day of September, in
the year of our Blessed Lord, 1497."


Plantagenet was deeply affected by his cousin's gallantry. He sighed,
saying, "Tudor has not, will not reply to your challenge?"

"He has not, but he may," replied Richard. "I have, I know not why, a
firm belief that good will come from it. If not, in a few days all will
be over. In a very few days you can be conveyed to St. Michael's Mount,
where the queen now is. The Adalid hovers near. Save her, save yourself:
save one other, less helpful than my Katherine--be a brother to
Monina."

Richard, erring in his mark, was animated by the most sanguine hopes, to
which he was seduced by a constant belief that his life was not near its
close, and therefore that his claims would be admitted: as otherwise he
had resolved to fall in the assertion of them. Leaving the sick couch of
his cousin, he prepared to advance to Taunton. A conversation meanwhile
which he dreamt not of, and would have scorned, had taken place in an
obscure and gloomy spot in London, fraught with fate to him.

After the base desertion of his royal master, Frion had sailed to
England with the other hirelings of Henry; among these was
Clifford--Clifford, whose need and whose malice armed him against
York's life, but who tried to hide his shame under an assumed
appellation. There had always been a false fellowship and a real enmity
between Frion and the knight. On his first arrival in Brussels, the
secretary looked on him as an interloper; and Clifford, while he used
the other, tried to force him into his place as an underling, and to
blind him to his own designs. When he betrayed his party, spreading
death among the partizans of York, and annihilating the cause, Frion,
whose fortunes depended on its success, was unmeasured in his
expressions of indignation and contempt. They had worked in direct
opposition the year before in Kent: and, when Frion saw the hand of this
reprobated man uplifted in midnight assassination, he triumphed in the
lowness of his fall. Both were traitors now, both baffled: Frion looked
on Clifford as the worse villain; and Clifford writhed under the
familiar impertinence of a menial. They arrived in London; Sir Robert
was dismissed with barren thanks, Frion thrown into prison; how far the
knight's account gave intimation of the Frenchman's double-dealing, and
so brought this severity upon him was not known, but for three months
this mercurial spirit had languished in confinement.

Addicted to scheming, he had now full leisure to spend his whole
thoughts that way; a single, simple plot was too plain for his
industrious soul; he wore a whole web of them so intricate, that he
sometimes lost the clue himself; not the less did he do his endeavour to
put them in action. He intended either to lose Richard or make him;
either to be the cause of his overthrowing Henry, or of being overthrown
by him; in either case, to reap favour and advantage from the triumphant
party.

Sad as is ever a prison-house, it was worse in those days of
incivilization: this pen could ill describe the squalid figures and dire
visages that crowded its tumultuous court. Even here Frion reigned
umpire; but he broke from a knot of noisy squabblers, who held tattered
cards, and appealed to him on a question of fair-play, as he saw one
enter. Even he a wretch, yet many degrees better than the best of his
miserable companions; a scarlet suit, trimmed with gold lace, somewhat
tarnished, a cloak of ample folds, but threadbare, a dark plumed bonnet,
drawn over his brow, above all, a rapier at his side, distinguished him
from the prisoners. "This is kind, Sir Robert," said Frion in his
softest manner, "I half feared you were too proud or politic to visit a
disgraced man; for these last three days I have despaired of your
worship; by my fay! you are right welcome."

Clifford cast a shuddering look around the walls; his eyes were hollow;
his cheek sunk; he was the mere shadow of bold Robert. "Few words are
best thanks, Master Stephen," he replied; "I am kind to you because the
dice are cruel to me; you promise largely, and my wants are no dwarfs.
What are your designs?"

"This is no place for parley," said Frion; "follow me." He led the way
through several narrow passages to a miserable cell; straw was heaped in
one corner for a bed; the walls were dank and tattered; the floor broken
and filthy. "Welcome to my domicile, sir knight," said Frion: whether it
were compunction that he had brought him to this, or distrust that the
injury would be revenged, Clifford shrunk back and his lips grew livid.
"One would not live here from choice," said Frion, "I allow; yet do not
grudge me a few moments, it may stead us both."

"To the point then," said the knight; "it is not the place, Master
Frion; but at the hour of noon--"

"No excuses, you like the place as ill as I," said the Frenchman, with a
bland smile; "but you are more generous, for I would not dwell an
instant's space here of my own will to gain any man's salvation. Now,
what news from the west? Is it true that the duke of York is slain? or
Exeter taken? both reports are rife. Adam Wicherly and Mat Oldcraft made
their escape two days ago, to join the gallant. Mat was seized again,
and says that there were bonfires in Southwark for Richard the Fourth."

Clifford, by a brief detail, answered, and then after some hesitation
said, "He is not so low but that the king desires him to be lower: he
who could bring him, bound hand and foot, to London, would be made a
man. Empson saw Garthe yesterday; and he, who calls me Wiatt, came post
to consult with me; but it were hazardous to attempt him; he is ten
thousand strong."

"You know me, Sir Robert," said Frion; "there are few things I cannot
bring about, so that I have room to ruffle in. I have a plot, King
Richard is ours in three days, so one word be said; that word is liberty
to me. Take you the reward; I ask no further share in your gains than
free leave to set the channel between me and this dingy island."

Each despising, each mistrusting the other, these men conspired for the
prince's fall: like "mousing owls" they hawked at an eagle with too true
an aim. York's thoughts were of honour; but through them they were to be
drugged with ignominy and despair. It is melancholy that circumstance
and fortune should have power to reach the very shrine of our dearest
thoughts; degrading them from their original brightness to a likeness of
the foul aspect of the outer world. Richard's free and noble spirit was
to become plastic to the touch of such men as the fallen Clifford and
crafty Frion. Men, whom he had cast from him as unworthy his regard,
could besiege the citadel of his hopes, and garrison it with disgrace;
forcing him to occupy himself with ideas as base as those which
possessed their own minds. It is the high heart's curse to be obliged to
expend its deep and sacred emotions in hatred of, or struggle with
things so mean, so very alien to its own aspiring nature.




CHAPTER XLV

ARRIVAL AT TAUNTON


     Ah! Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind,
     I see thy glory, like a shooting star,
     Fall to the base earth from the firmament.

                                           SHAKSPEARE.


Richard proceeded towards Taunton. Although this was in appearance an
advance, his ill success before Exeter, and report of the large force
already brought against them by Sir John Cheney, King Henry's
chamberlain, had so far discouraged his followers as to occasion the
desertion of many, so that of the seven thousand he had with him in
Devonshire, he retained but three on his arrival near Taunton. These
consisted of the original body of insurgents, Cornishmen, who had
proceeded too far to go back, and who, partly in affection for their
leader, partly from natural stubbornness, swore to die in the cause.
Poor fellows! rusty rapiers, and misshapen lances were their chief arms;
a few had bows; others slings; a still greater number their ponderous
tools, implements of labour and of peace, to be used now in slaughter.
Their very dress displayed at once their unmartial and poverty-stricken
state. In all these might be gathered a troop of three hundred foot, not
wholly destitute of arms and discipline. The horse were not less at
fault; yet among them there were about one hundred tolerably mounted,
the riders, indeed, but too frequently disgracing their steeds.

It required all Richard's energy of purpose to hold him back from
despair. The bitter sense of degradation visited him in spite of every
effort. Had he ever made one of the chivalry of France and Burgundy? Had
he run a tilt with James of Scotland, or grasped in knightly brotherhood
the mailed hand of Sir Patrick Hamilton? And were these his comrades?
unwashed artificers; ragged and rude peasants; vulgar-tongued traders?
He felt "in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes;" and now to obtain
pardon for them, to send them back scathless to their own homes, was his
chief desire, even to the buying of their safety with his own downfall.

After a two days' march he arrived near Taunton. On reconnoitring the
town, its position and weakness gave him hope that he might carry it,
even with his sorry soldiery. To check these thoughts, tidings came,
that Sir John Cheney was in close neighbourhood, and Henry himself
advancing with a chosen body of men. On the evening of their arrival
before the town, a detachment of the enemy entered it, cutting off the
last hope of Richard.

The next morning it became evident that the crisis of his fortunes was
at hand. The whole country teemed with soldiery. As the troops poured
towards a common centre, the array and order of a battle-field became
apparent in their operations. A battle, between a very myriad of
golden-spurred knights, armed at all points, and the naked inhabitants
of Richard's camp! call it rather a harvest; there were the
reapers, here the bending corn. When in the north Richard wept
over the devastation of the land, he felt that a word of his could
counteract the harm--but now, his challenge had proved an airy
dagger--substance-less--his resolve to encounter his foe, bringing the
unarmed against these iron-suited warriors, grew in his eyes into
premeditated murder: his heart heaved in his overcharged breast. To add
bitterness to his thoughts there were his companions--O'Water brave in
despair; Astley pale with fear for his lord; Heron foolish in his
unmeaning boasting; Skelton trembling in every joint, and talking
incessantly, apparently to deafen himself to "the small still voice"
that whispered terror to his heart.

Richard spent the day among his men. They were prepared to fight; if
needs must, to fall: protestations of sturdy devotion, the overflowing
of the rude, manly heart, always affecting, met him at every turn. He
was beloved, for he was generous and kind. Often he had exposed his
life, when before Exeter, to save some one among them: when dismayed, he
had cheered, when defeated, he had comforted them; nor did he leave the
body of the meanest camp-follower uninterred; for one of Richard's
characteristics was a quick sympathy with his species, and a reverence
for all that bore the shape of man. But, while these qualities rendered
him dear to all, they inspired him with a severe sense of his duties
towards others, and a quick insight into their feelings; thus increasing
to anguish the disquietude that agitated him.

Towards evening he was alone in his tent. At first he was confused by
the various aspects, all terrible, that his fortunes assumed. By the
caprice of destiny, he, who was descended from a line of kings, who had
so long been the inhabitant of courts, a cavalier, honourable in his
degree, renowned for his prowess, had not one noble-born partizan near
him: not one of his ancient counsellors, to whom he had been used to
defer, remained; he was absolutely alone; the sense of right and justice
in his own heart was all he possessed, to be a beacon-light in this
awful hour, when thousands depended upon his word--yet had he the power
to save?

An idea, dim at first as a star on the horizon's verge, struggling
through vapours, but growing each second brighter and clearer, dawned
upon his mind. All then was over! his prophetic soul had proved false in
its presumed foreknowledge; defeat, dishonour, disgrace tracked his
steps. To lead his troops forth, and then to redeem them at Henry's
hand, by the conditionless surrender of himself, was the thought, child
of despair and self-devotion, that, still struggling with the affections
and weaknesses of his nature, presented itself, not yet full fledged,
but about to become so.

He had been several times interrupted during his meditations by the
arrival of scouts, with various reports of the situation and proceedings
of the enemy: Richard, better than these untaught recruits, knew the
meaning of the various operations. As if on a map, he saw the stationing
of a large and powerful army in expectation of battle; and was aware how
incapable he was to cope with their numbers and force. At last Astley
announced the arrival of two men: one was a Fleming, known to Richard as
one of Lalayne's men, but the fellow was stupidly drunk; the other was
an English peasant. "Please your worship," he said, "I am this man's
guide, and must act as his interpreter besides; nothing would serve the
spungy fellow but he must swallow ale at every tavern on the way."

"Speak, then," said Richard; "what is the purport of his journey?"

"Please you, sir, last night three hundred of them came right pop upon
us afore we were aware: sore afraid they made us with their tall
iron-shafted poles, steel caps, and short swords, calling each one for
bread and beer."

"Do you mean," cried the prince, his eye brightening as he spoke, "that
three hundred men, soldiers, armed like yonder fellow, are landed in
England?"

So the countryman averred; and that even now they were but at the
distance of twenty miles from Richard's encampment. They were still
advancing, when the report was spread that the prince's forces were
dispersed, himself taken prisoner. The rustic drew from the Fleming's
pocket a letter, in French, signed by Schwartz, a son of him who fell at
Stoke, a man in high favour with the Lady Margaret of Burgundy. It said
how he had been despatched by her grace to his succour; how intelligence
of the large army of Henry, and his defeat, had so terrified his men,
that they refused to proceed, nay, by the next morning would take their
way back to Poole, where they had landed, unless Richard himself came to
reassure them, and to lead them on. Every word of the letter lighted up
to forgotten joy young Richard's elastic spirit. With these men to aid
him, giving weight and respectability to his powers, he might hope to
enforce the conditions of his challenge. All must be decided on the
morrow; that very hour he would set forth, to return before morning
with these welcome succours.

It was near midnight; his camp was still: the men, in expectation of the
morrow's struggle, had retired to repose; their leaders had orders to
visit their commander in his tent at the hour which now the empty
hour-glass told was come. Hastily, eagerly, Richard announced the
arrival of these German mercenaries; he directed them to accompany him,
that with some show of attendance he might present himself to Schwartz.
The camp was not to be disturbed; two or three men alone among them were
awakened, and ordered to keep guard--in five hours assuredly he must
return. In a brief space of time, the troop who were to accompany him,
Heron, Skelton, O'Water, and Astley, with some forty more, led their
horses to his tent in silence:--there were few lights through all the
camp; their honest hearts which beat within slept, while he was awake to
succour and save them. This was Richard's last thought, as, mounted on
his good steed, he led the way across the dim heath towards Yeovil.

It was such a night as is frequent at the end of September; a warm but
furious west-wind tore along the sky, shaking the dark tresses of the
tress, and chasing the broad shadows of the clouds across the plains.
The moon, at the beginning of her third quarter, sped through the sky
with rapid silvery wings; now cutting the dark, sea-like ether; now
plunging deep amidst the clouds; now buried in utter darkness; anon
spreading a broad halo among the thinner woof of vapours. The guide was
at the prince's side; Heron, upon his short, sturdy pony, was just
behind; Skelton tried to get his tall mare to an even pace with
Richard's horse, but she fell back continually: the rushing, howling
wind and rustling trees drowned the clatter of the hoofs. They reached
the extreme edge of the common; Richard turned his head--the lights of
his little camp burnt dim in the moonshine, its poor apparel of tents
was lost in the distance: they entered a dark lane, and lost sight of
every trace of it; still they rode fleetly on. Night, and the obscure
shapes of night around--holy, blinding, all-seeing night! when we feel
the power of the Omnipotent as if immediately in contact with us; when
religion fills the soul, and our very fears are unearthly; when familiar
images assume an unknown power to thrill our hearts; and the winds and
trees and shapeless clouds have a voice not their own, to speak of all
that we dream or imagine beyond our actual life. Through embowered
lanes, whose darkness seemed thick and palpable--over open, moonshiny
fields, where the airy chase of clouds careered in dimmer shapes upon
the earth--Richard rode forward, fostering newly-awakened hope; glad in
the belief that while he saved all who depended on him, he would not
prove a mere victim led in tame submission, an unrighteous sacrifice to
the Evil Spirit of the World.




CHAPTER XLVI

A PRISONER


     Art thou he, traitor! that with treason vile
       Hast slain my men in this unmanly manner,
     And now triumphest in the piteous spoil
       Of these poor folk; whose souls with black dishonour
       And foul defame do deck thy bloody banner?
     The meed whereof shall shortly be thy shame,
       And wretched end which still attendeth on her.
     With that himself to battle he did frame;
     So did his forty yeomen which there with him came.

                                                    SPENSER.


Some miles to the east of Yeovil there was a deep stream, whose
precipitous banks were covered by a thick underwood that almost
concealed the turbid waters, which undermined and bared the twisted and
gnarled roots of the various overhanging trees or shrubs. The left side
of the stream was bounded by an abrupt hill, at the foot of which was a
narrow pathway; on the green acclivity flourished a beech grove, whose
roots were spread in many directions to catch the soil, while their
trunks, some almost horizontal, were all fantastically grown, and the
fairy tracery of the foliage shed such soft, mellowed, chequered light
as must incline the heart of the wanderer beneath the leafy bower to
delicious musings.

Now the moon silvered the trees, and sometimes glimmered on the waters,
whose murmurs contended with the wind that sung among the boughs: and
was this all? A straggling moonbeam fell on something bright amid the
bushes, and a deep voice cried, "Jack of the Wynd, if thou can'st not
get to thicker cover, pluck darnels to cover that cursed steel cap of
thine."

"Hush!" repeated another lower voice, "your bawling is worse than his
head-piece; you outroar the wind. How high the moon is, and our friends
not come;--he will be here before them."

"Hark! a bell!"

"Matins, by the Fiend! may _he_ seize that double-tongued knave! I much
suspect Master Frion; I know him of old."

"He cannot mar us now, though it be he who made this ambushment."

"Oh, by your leave! he has the trick of it, and could spring a mine in
the broadest way; he can turn and twist, and show more faces than a die.
He this morn--I know the laugh--there is mischief in 't."

"But, your worship, now, what can he do?"

"Do! darken the moon; set these trees alive and dancing; do! so play the
Will o' the Wisp that the king shall be on Pendennis and the duke at
Greenwich, and each fancy he is within bow-shot of the other; do! ask
the devil what is in his compact, for he is but the Merry Andrew of
Doctor Frion. Hush!"

"It is he," said the other speaker.

A breathless pause ensued; the wind swept through the trees--another
sound--its monotonous recurrence showed that it was a dashing
waterfall--and yet again it grew louder.

"It is he."

"No, Gad's mercy, it comes westward--close, my merry fellows, close,
and mind the word! close, for we have but half our number, and yet he
may escape."

Again the scene sank into silence and darkness: such silence as is
nature's own, whose voice is ever musical: such darkness as the
embowering trees and vast island-clouds made, dimming and drinking up
the radiance of the moon.

The stillness was broken by the tramp of horses drawing near, men's
voices mingled with the clatter, and now several cavaliers entered the
defile; they rode in some disorder, and so straggling, that it was
probable that many of their party lagged far behind: the principal
horseman had reached midway the ravine, when suddenly a tree, with all
its growth of green and tangled boughs, fell right across the path; the
clatter of the fall deafened the screech which accompanied it, for one
rider was overthrown; it was succeeded by a flight of arrows from
concealed archers. "Ride for your lives," cried Richard: but his path
was crossed by six horsemen, while, starting from the coppice, a band of
near forty men engaged with the van of his troop, who tried to wheel
about: some escaped, most fell. With his sword drawn, the prince rushed
at his foremost enemy; it was a mortal struggle for life and liberty,
for hatred and revenge. Richard was the better swordsman, but his horse
was blown, and half sunk upon his haunches, when pressed closely by the
adversary. Richard saw his danger, and yet his advantage, for his foe,
over-eager to press him down, forgot the ward; he rose on his stirrups,
and grasped his sword with both hands, when a blow from behind, a
coward's blow, from a battle-axe, struck him; it was repeated, and he
fell lifeless on the earth.

Sickness, and faintness, and throbbing pain were the first tokens of
life that visited his still failing sense; sight and the power of motion
seemed to have deserted him, but memory reviving told him that he was a
prisoner. Moments were stretched to ages while he strove to collect his
sensations; still it was night; the view of fields and uplands and of
the varied moon-lit sky grew upon his languid senses; he was still on
horseback, bound to the animal, and supported on either side by men. As
his movements communicated his returning strength, one of these fellows
rode to impart the tidings to their leader, while the other stayed to
guide his horse; the word "gallop!" was called aloud, and he was urged
along at full speed, while the sudden motion almost threw him back into
his swoon.

Dawn, which at first seemed to add to the dimness and indistinctness of
the landscape, struggling through the clouds, and paling the moon,
slowly stole upon them. The prince became sufficiently alive to make
observations; he and his fellow-prisoners were five in number only,
their guards were ten; foremost among them was one whom, in whatever
guise, he could not mistake. Each feeling in Richard's heart stimulated
him to abhor that man, yet he pitied him more. Gallant, bold Robin, the
frolicksome page, the merry-witted sharer of a thousand pleasures. Time,
thou art a thief; how base a thief--when thou stealest not only our
friends, our youth, our hopes, but, besides, our innocence; giving us in
the place of light-hearted confidence--guile, distrust, the
consciousness of evil deeds. In these thoughts, Richard drew the
colouring of the picture, from the fresh and vivid tints that painted
his own soul. Clifford's breast had perhaps never been free from the
cares of guilt: he had desired honour; he had loved renown; but the
early development of passion and of talent had rendered him, even in
boyhood, less single-hearted than Richard now.

Clifford was triumphant; he possessed Monina's beloved--the cause of
his disgrace--bound, a prisoner, and wounded. Why then did pain distort
his features, and passion flush his brow? No triumph laughed in his eye,
or sat upon his lip. He hated the prince; but he hated and despised
himself. He played a dastardly and a villain's part; and shame awaited
even success. The notoriety and infamy that attended on him (exaggerated
as those things usually are, in his own eyes), made him fear to meet, in
the neighbouring villages or towns, any noble cavalier who might
recognise him; even if he saw a party of horsemen on the road he turned
out of it, and thus got entangled among by-paths in an unfrequented part
of the country. They continued the same fast career for several hours,
till they entered a wild dark forest, where the interminable branches of
the old oaks met high-arched overhead, and the paths were beset with
fern and underwood. The road they took was at first a clear and open
glade, but it quickly narrowed, and branched off in various directions;
they followed one of its windings till it abruptly closed: the leader
then reined in, and Clifford's voice was heard. Years had elapsed since
it had met Richard's ear; the mere, as it were, abstract idea of
Clifford was mingled with crime and hate; his voice, his manner, his
look were associated with protestations of fidelity; or, dearer still,
the intercourse of friendship and youthful gaiety; no wonder that it
seemed a voice from the grave to betrayed York. "Halloo!" cried
Clifford, "Clym of the Lyn, my merry man, thou art to track us through
the New Forest to Southampton."

"Please your knightship," said a shaggy-headed fellow, "our way is
clear, I am at home now: but, by Saint George, we must halt; a thirty
miles' ride since matins, his fast unbroken, would have made Robin Hood
a laggard."

"What would you eat here?" cried Clifford; "a stoup of canary and beef
were blessings for the nonce; but we must get out of this accursed
wilderness into more Christian neighbourhood before we find our
hostelry."

Clym of the Lyn grinned. "To a poor forester," said he, "the green-wood
is a royal inn; vert and venison, your worship, sound more savoury than
four smoky walls, and a platter of beef brought in mine host's left
hand, while his right already says--'Pay!'"

"They would feed me with mine own venison in way of courtesy, even as
the Lion Heart, my namesake and ancestor, was feasted of old;
mine--each acre, each rood, and every noble stag that pastures thereon;
but I am not so free as they; and, mine though this wild wood be, I must
thank an outlaw ere I dine upon my own."

Thus thought Richard; and at that moment, with his limbs aching through
their bondage, and with throbbing temples, liberty in the free forest
seemed worth more than a kingdom. The bright sun was high--the sky
serene--the merry birds were carolling in the brake--the forest basked
in noon-day, while the party wound along the shady path beneath. The
languid frame of York revived; at first to pain alone, for memory was
serpent-fanged. What bird-lime was this to ensnare the royal eagle! but
soon Despair, which had flapped her harpy wings across his face,
blinding him, fled away; Hope awoke, and in her train, schemes of
escape, freedom, and a renewal of the struggle.

Meanwhile they threaded many a green pathway, and, after another hour's
ride, arrived at the opening of a wide grassy dell; a deer, "a stag of
ten," leaped from his ferny bed and bounded away; a herd of timid fawns,
just visible in the distance, hurried into the thicket; while many a
bird flew from the near sprays. Here the party halted; first they
unbitted their steeds, and then dismounted the prisoners, binding them
for security's sake to a tree. Richard was spared this degradation, for
still he was a prince in Clifford's eyes; and his extreme physical
weakness, caused by his blow, made even the close watching him
superfluous. He was lifted from his horse, and placed upon the turf, and
there left. While some of his guards went to seek and slay their repast,
others led their animals to a brook which murmured near; all were
variously and busily employed. Clifford alone remained; he called for
water; evidently he was more weary than he chose to own; he took off his
casque: his features were ghastly: there was a red streak upon his brow,
which was knit as if to endurance, and his lips were white and
quivering. Never had crime visited with such torment ill-fated man; he
looked a Cain after the murder; the Abel he had killed was his own fair
fame--the ancestral honour of his race. How changed from when Richard
last saw him, but two years before; his hair was nearly grey, his eyes
hollow, his cheeks fallen in; yet, though thin to emaciation, he had
lost that delicacy and elegance of feature that had characterized him.
Almost without reflection, forgetting his own position in painful
compassion, the prince exclaimed, "Thou art an unhappy man. Sir Robert?"
The knight replied with a ghastly smile, which he meant to be
disdainful. "But now," continued Richard, "while thy visor screened thy
face, I was on the point of taunting thee as a coward, of defying thee
to mortal combat; but thou art miserable, and broken-hearted, and no
match for me."

Clifford's eyes glared, his hand was upon his sword's hilt: he
recollected himself, replying, "You cannot provoke me, sir, you are my
prisoner."

"Thy victim, Robin; though once saved by thee: but that is past, and
there is no return. The blood of Stanley, and of a hundred other
martyrs, rolls between us: I conquer my own nature, when even for a
moment I look upon their murderer."

The weakness of the prince gave a melancholy softness to his voice and
manner; the deep pity he felt for his fallen friend imparted a seraphic
expression to his clear open countenance. Clifford writhed with pain.
Clifford, who, though not quick to feel for others, was all sense and
sensitiveness for himself: and how often in the world do we see
sensibility attributed to individuals, whose show of feeling arises from
excessive susceptibility to their own sorrows and injuries! Clifford
wished to answer--to go away--he was spell-bound; his cowering look
first animated Richard to an effort, which a moment before he would have
ridiculed. "Wherefore," said he, "have you earned all men's hate, and
your own to boot? Are you more honoured and loved than in Brussels?
Scorn tracks you in your new career, and worst of all, you despise
yourself."

"By St. Sathanas and his brood!" fiercely burst from the knight. Then he
bit his lip, and was silent.

"Yet, Clifford, son of a noble father, spare yourself this crowning sin.
I have heard from travelled men, that in Heathenesse the unbaptized
miscreant is true to him whose hospitality he has shared. There was a
time when my eyes brightened when I saw you; when the name of Robin was
a benediction to be. You have changed it for the direst curse. Yours are
no common crimes. Foremost in the chronicles, your name will stand as a
type and symbol of ingratitude and treason, written with the blood of
Fitzwater and Stanley. But this is not all. The young and defenceless
you destroy: you have stood with uplifted dagger over the couch of a
sleeping man."

Clifford had fostered the belief that this vilest act of his life, to
which he had been driven rather by fierce revenge than hope of reward,
was a secret. A moment before he had advanced with hasty and furious
glances towards his enemy. Scarcely had the words passed York's lips,
than a kind of paralysis came over him. His knees knocked together: his
arms fell nerveless to his side.

"O, man!" continued York, "arouse thy sleeping faculties. Bid the fiend
who tortures thee avaunt! Even now, at the word, he feels his power over
thy miserable soul waver. By Him who died on the Cross, I conjure him to
leave thee. Say thou 'amen' to my adjuration, and he departs. Cast off
the huge burthen of guilt: deliver thy soul into the care of holy men.
As thy first act, depart this spot: leave me. It is I who
command--Richard of York, thy sovereign. Begone; or kneeling at my
feet, seek the grace thou hast so dearly forfeited."

For a moment it almost seemed as if the wretched man were about to obey;
but at the moment his groom came from the spring, where he had been
watering his horse. The sight of another human being, to witness his
degradation, awoke him to frenzy. He called aloud, "How now, sirrah!
Why, unbit Dragon? Bring him here. I must begone."

"He can't carry your honour a mile," said the fellow.

"A miracle," cried Richard; "you repent, Sir Robert."

"As Lucifer in hell! Look to the prisoner." Clifford vaulted on his
horse: his head was bare, his eyes wild and bloodshot. Clapping spurs to
the jaded animal's side, he put him to his speed, and was gone.

"His fit is on him!" cried his attendant, "and what are we to do? He
rides a race with the fiend, leaving us to do both their works." More
whisperingly he muttered, "Hold Duke Richard in bonds against his will
may I not. He gave me gold in Flanders; he is a king's son and a belted
knight, and I a poor servitor."

Richard had conceived a faint hope of working on Clifford's manifest
remorse, and enlisting him again under the banner of the White Rose. His
wonder was great when he saw him flying through the forest with
uncovered head and dishevelled hair; the bridle of his horse in the
groom's hand, while the wearied animal, spurred to speed, threw up his
head, snorting with fear. Not a moment was to be lost, the prince flew
to his comrades in captivity. Already Heron and O'Water had their bonds
cut by the sword of which he possessed himself. Heron, in whose two arms
lay his chief strength, and O'Water, at home in a fray, fired with the
desire of liberty and life, got speedy hold of battle-axes, and stood at
bay. Skelton, the next made free, began to run; but finding his flight
was solitary, he secured a bow and arrows, and betook himself to a
short, sure aim from behind a tree, while he offered up another sigh to
the memory of Trereife. Astley threw himself foremost before his master,
unarmed. The weapons of their guard were chiefly in a heap, and these,
defended by the enfranchised prisoners, were useless to them. Headed by
Clifford's groom, who stood in salutary awe of shedding royal blood, a
parley commenced. He entreated Richard to submit; he told him that the
whole country was in arms against him, his way back to his army beset,
the sea-coasts strictly guarded. What then could he do?

"Die, in arms and at liberty. Stand back, sirs; what would you do with
me? Your guilty captain has deserted you; is there one of your number
who will raise his accursed weapon against a king and a knight?"

Clym of the Lyn, and another outlawed forester (Clifford in mustering a
troop had gathered together all manner of wild companions), now appeared
dragging in a fat buck. Clym grinned when he saw the altered state of
things: "Come, my men," he said, "it is not for us to fight King Henry's
battles; the more majesties there be in England, the merrier for us, I
trow; and the wider and freer the range of the king of the New Forest.
Put up your rapiers, and let us feast like brethren; ye may fall to with
your weapons afterwards. Or, if it please your grace to trust to me, I
will lead you where none of the king's men will follow."

"Wilt thou guide me back to Taunton?" asked the prince.

"Not for my cap full of rose nobles," replied the outlaw; "the way is
beset: and trust me your worship's men are scattered far and wide ere
this. You are a tall fellow, and I should ill like to see you in their
gripe. Be one of us; you shall be king of the Greenwood-shade; and a
merrier, freer monarch than he who lives at Westminster."

"Hark!" the word, spoken in a voice of alarm, made the party all ear.
There was a distant tramp--every now and then a breaking of
bushes--and a whole herd of deer came bounding up the glade in flight.
A forester who had rambled further than the rest, rushed back, saying,
"Sixty yeomen of the royal guard! They are coming hitherward. Sir Harry
de Vere leads them--I know his bright bay horse."

"Away!"




CHAPTER XLVII

A DILEMMA


     He might have dwelt in green forest,
       Under the shadows green;
     And have kept both him and us at rest,
       Out of all trouble and teen.

                                     OLD BALLAD.


It had been the policy of Richard's captors to have remained to deliver
up their prisoners to a stronger force. But most of them were outlaws by
profession, who held the king's men in instinctive horror: these were
the first to fly; the panic spread; those who had no cause to fear fled
because they saw others do so. In a moment the sward was cleared of all
save the prisoners, who hastily bridled their horses, and followed York
down a narrow path into a glen, in an opposite direction from the
approaching troop. With what speed they might they made their way
through the forest, penetrating its depths, till they got completely
entangled in its intricacies. They proceeded for several hours, but
their jaded horses one by one foundered: they were in the most savage
part of the wood: there was no beginning nor end to the prospect of
knotted trunks, which lifted their vast leafy burthen into the air; here
was safety and needful repose. Richard, animated to a sudden effort,
could now hardly keep his seat: the state of their animals was
imperative for a halt; so here, in a wild brake, they alighted near a
running brook; and here O'Water slew a buck, while Astley and Skelton
unbridled their horses, and all set about preparing a most needful
repast. Evening stole upon them before it was concluded; the slant
sun-beams lay in golden glory on the twisted ivy-grown trunks, and
bathed the higher foliage in radiance. By the time their appetites were
satisfied, Heron and Skelton were discovered to be in a sound sleep; it
were as well to follow their example; neither men nor horses could
proceed without repose; darkness also afforded best safety for
travelling. It was agreed that they should pursue their way at midnight;
and so, stretched on the grassy soil, peace and the beauty of nature
around them, each gave himself up to a slumber which, at that extremity
of fatigue, needed no courting.

All slept, save the prince; he lay in a state of feverish disquietude,
looking at the sky through the leafy tracery overhead, till night massed
and confused every object. Darkest thoughts thronged his mind; loss of
honour, desertion of friends, the fate of his poor men: he was to have
devoted himself to them, but a stream, driven by a thundering avalanche
from its course, had as much power as he to oppose the circumstances
that had brought him from his camp near Taunton, to this secluded spot.
For an interval he gave himself up to a tumult of miserable ideas, till
from the grim troop some assumed a milder aspect, some a brighter hue;
and, after long and painful consideration, he arranged such a plan as
promised at least to vindicate his own name, and to save the lives of
his adherents. Calmed by these thoughts, soothed to repose by the gentle
influence of a south wind, and the sweet monotony of rustling leaves and
running-water, he sank at last into a dreamless sleep.

A whispering of voices was the first thing that struck his wakening
sense: it was quite dark. "Is Master O'Water come back?" asked Heron.

"I am here," replied the Irishman.

"Hast discovered aught?"

"That the night is dark, and the forest wide," replied O'Water; "had we
a planet to guide us we might hope to reach its skirts. We are worse off
than the Spanish Admiral on the western sea, for the compass was a star
without a cloud to him."

"Saint Mary save us!" said, or rather whined poor Skelton, "our fortunes
are slit from top to toe, and no patch-work will make them whole."

"There is hope at the mouth of a culverin," said O'Water, "or at the
foot of the gallows, so that a man be true to himself. I have weathered
a worse day, when the Macarthys swore to revenge themselves on the
Roches."

"And by our Lady's grace," interrupted Richard, "shall again, worthy
mayor. My good fellows, fear nothing, I will save you; the ocean cannot
be many miles off, for the sun set at our right hand, and blinded our
eyes through the day; the wind by its mildness is southerly; we will
face it. When once we reach the seaside, the shore of the free, wide
ocean, Tudor's power stops short, and ye are safe; of myself there will
then be time to think. Say, shall we proceed now, or give another hour
to repose?"

All were eager to start, slowly leading their horses through the tangled
paths they could find, the quarter whence the wind blew, their only
guide; morning found them toiling on, but morning diminished half their
labours; and, as the birds twittered, and the east gleamed, their
spirits rose to meet and conquer danger. O'Water was in his native
element, that of hair-breadth escape and peril. As to Heron and Skelton,
they might have flagged, but for Richard; he flattered their pride,
raised their hopes, making weariness and danger a plaything and a jest.
As the sun mounted in the sky, their horses showed many a sign of
weariness; and in spite of a store of venison, which the careful Skelton
had brought away with him, they needed refreshment; each mile lengthened
to ten; each glade grew interminable in their eyes; and the wide forest
seemed to possess all England in its extent. Could the prince's body
have conquered his mind, the White Rose had indeed drooped; he was
parched with fever, and this, preying on his brain, made him the victim
of conflicting thoughts: his heart, his imagination, were in his
deserted camp; even fair Katherine, awaiting tidings of him in her far
retreat, had not such power to awaken anguish in his heart, as the idea
of Henry's vengeance exercised on his faithful, humble friends, whose
father and protector he had called himself. There was disease in the
fire and rapidity with which these ideas coursed through his mind; with
a strong will he overcame them, bent on accomplishing his present
purpose, and rescuing these chief rebels, whose lives were most
endangered, before he occupied himself with the safety of the rest.

At length, at noon, his quick ear caught a heavy, distant roar. The
trees had begun to be more scattered: they reached the verge of the
forest; they were too weary to congratulate each other; before them was
a rising ground which bounded their view; some straggling cottages
crowned the height; slowly they reached the hill-top, and there beheld
stormy ocean, clipping in the circular coast with watery girdle; at a
crow's flight it might be a mile distant. A few huts and a single black
boat spotted in one place the else desert beach; a south wind swept the
sea, and vast surges broke upon the sands; all looked bleak and
deserted.

They stopped at a cottage-door, inquiring the road; they heard there was
one, which went three miles about, but that the plain at their feet was
intersected by wide ditches, which their fagged animals could not leap.
Moreover, what hope of putting out to sea, in opposition to the big
noisy waves which the wind was hurrying towards shore! It were safest
and best to take a short repose in this obscure village. Heron and
Skelton entered the poor inn, while Richard waited on his horse,
striving to win him by caresses to taste the food he at first refused.
Heron, who was warm-hearted with all his bluster, brought the prince out
a flagon of excellent wine, such as by some chance--it might be a
wreck--the tide had wafted from the opposite coast: Richard was too ill
to drink; but, as he stood, his arm on his poor steed's neck, the
creature looked wistfully up in his face, averting his mouth from the
proffered grain; half-play fully his master held out to him the
wide-mouthed flagon, and he drank with such eagerness, that Richard
vowed he should have another bottle, and, buying the host's consent with
gold, filled a large can from the wine-cask; the beast drank, and, had
he been a Christian man, could not have appeared more refreshed. The
prince, forgetful of his pains, was amusing himself thus, when Skelton,
pale and gasping, came from the house, and voiceless through fear, laid
one hand on his leader's arm, and with the other pointed: too soon the
hapless fugitive saw to what he called his attention. Along the shore of
the sea a moving body was perceptible, approaching towards them from
west to east, which soon showed itself to be a troop of horse soldiers.
Richard gave speedy order that his friends should assemble and mount,
while he continued to watch the proceedings of the enemy.

They were about two hundred strong--they arrived at the huts on the
beach, and the prince perceived that they were making dispositions to
leave a part of their number behind. Fifty men were selected, and posted
as patrol--the rest then, moved forward, still towards the east. By
this time the remaining fugitives had mounted, and gathered in one
spot--the villagers also were collecting--Skelton's teeth
chattered--he asked an old woman if there were any sanctuary near.

"Ay, by our Lady, is there," replied the dame, "sixteen miles along the
coast is the monastery of Beaulieu. A sanctuary for princes; by the same
token that the Lady Margaret, Saint Henry's queen, lived safely therein
spite of the wicked Yorkists, who would have taken her precious life."

Richard turned quickly round as the woman spoke and heard her words, but
again his eyes were attracted to the coast. As the troop were proceeding
along the sands, the little knot of horsemen perched upon the hill
caught the attention of a soldier. He rode along the lines, and spoke to
the commanding officer; a halt ensued, "We are lost," cried Skelton, "we
are taken, Lord! Lord! will they grant us our lives?"

"These trees are tempting, and apt for hanging," said O'Water, with the
air of a connoisseur.

"Oh, for Bewley,--for Bewley, let us ride!" exclaimed Skelton, longing
to go, yet afraid of separating himself from his companions.

Still the prince watched the movements of the adverse party. Ten men
were detached, and began to advance inland--"Oh, dear, my lord," cried
Astley, "betake yourself to the forest--there are a thousand ways of
baffling these men. I will meet them, and put them to fault. Hide, for
my Lady's sake, ride!"

"Master Astley is a cunning gentleman," said Skelton; "our horses are
aweary, and a little craft would help us mightily."

Still Richard's eyes were fixed on the troopers--the men advanced as
far as a broad, deep stream, which intersected the plain; here they
hesitated; one of the best mounted leaped across, the others drew back,
seeking along the steep, shelving banks for a ford, or a narrowing of
the stream. The eyes of the troop on the shore were now turned upon
their comrades. "Our time is come," cried Richard; "back to the forest."
One step took them down the other side of the hill, hiding sea and beach
and enemy from their eyes, and screening them also from observation.
They soon reached the forest, and entered its shade; and then proceeded
along just within its skirts. "Whither?" respectfully O'Water asked,
after Skelton had for some time been muttering many a hint concerning
sanctuary.

"To Beaulieu," said the prince. "We are barred out from the ocean--we
are beset at land--the little island ycleped sanctuary is all that is
left to ye. God speed us safely hither."

Richard's horse was lively and refreshed after his generous draught, but
these of the others flagged. The prince exerted himself to keep up the
spirits of all; he rallied Skelton, spoke comfort to Astley, and good
hope to Heron. The sturdy apprentice of danger, flight, and trouble,
O'Water, treated it all as a matter of course--even hanging, if it so
chanced, was but a likely accident--the others needed more
encouragement. Astley feared for his lord, even to an appearance of
timidity, which, though disinterested, had a bad effect on the others.
Heron complained bitterly that his dinner had been left unfinished;
while the poor tailor, now fancying that he would run away from all, now
fearful of solitary misadventure, kept up a garrulous harangue, of which
terror was the burthen and the sum, Richard's voice was cheerful, his
manner gay; but, placing his hand on Astley, it felt scorching; every
moment it required more energy to throw off the clinging lethargy that
fell upon him. It was again evening--a circumstance that had caused
them to enter deeper into the forest; and it was to be feared they had
lost their way. All were weary--all, save Richard, hungry. The breeze
had died away; the air was oppressive, and more and more it felt like a
load intolerable to the prince's burning brow. Night began to close in
so very dark, that the horses refused to go forward. Suddenly a roaring
sound arose, which was not the sea; and, but that the atmosphere was so
still, the wanderers would have said that it was a fierce wind among the
trees. Such must it be, for now it came nearer; like living things, the
vast giants of the forest tossed their branches furiously; and entire
darkness and sudden pouring rain revealed the tempest, which their leafy
prison had before hidden--all was so instantaneous, that it would seem
that nature was undergoing some great revulsion in her laws. The
prince's horse snorted and reared, while O'Water's dashed furiously on,
striking against a tree, and throwing his rider, from whose lips there
escaped a shriek. What would have been the last overflowing drop in the
bitter cup to a weak mind, restored Richard--lassitude and despondency
vanished. In an instant he was off his horse at O'Water's side, speaking
in his own cheerful, kind voice. "Waste no moment on me," cried the
generous mayor. "My leg is broken--I can go no further--speed you,
your highness, to the sanctuary."

This was the end of hope--the raging storm, the disabled man, dark
night, and Richard's resolve not to desert his follower, all were causes
of terror and of despair.

A voice in the wood was heard calling aloud; no answer could be
returned; it was repeated, and Astley went forward to reconnoitre--even
an enemy were help in such disaster, yet Heron and Skelton implored him
to remain. Another halloo Richard answered; for he recognized Astley's
voice, who in the dark could not find his way back. He came at last,
accompanied by a monk--this was heaven's favour revealed; for the holy
man was a hermit, and his poor cell was near: poor indeed was it, built
with logs, the interstices filled with mud; a bed of dried leaves was
nearly all the furniture. The hermit had gone on first, and lit a torch;
as they might, they bore along poor O'Water, and placed him in his agony
on the low couch. The hermit looked inquisitively on all the party,
neglecting to answer Skelton, who asked for the hundredth time the
distance to Beaulieu.

Richard still occupied himself with the mayor, endeavouring to discover
if the limb were broken. "By your leave, your grace," said the hermit,
"I am somewhat of a chirurgeon; I boast of my cures of horses, and have
saved a Christian man ere now."

Scarcely did the prince remember to wonder at the title by which the
unknown addressed him. By our Lady's love he besought him to attend to
his friend. "Trust me," said the hermit, "I will not fail; but you, my
lord, must not tarry here; the forest is beset with troops; but for
night and storm, you would hardly attain Beaulieu in safety. It is but
two miles distant: I will guide your highness thither; and then return
to your follower. Have faith in me, my lord; I have served your royal
uncle, and was enlisted under your banner last year in Kent. I made a
shift to escape, and took sanctuary; but the stone walls of a monastery
are little better than those of a prison; so I betook me to the woods.
Oh, I beseech you, waste no time: I will return to your follower: he is
safe till then."

"Direct us, and I will thank you," replied Richard; "but you shall not
desert your patient even for a moment."

There was no alternative but to comply: the man gave as clear
instructions as he might, and Richard again set forward with his
diminished party. They were long entangled by trees; and it was now
quite night: the excitement over, the prince had drooped again. Even
this interval was full of peril--a tramp of steeds was heard: they drew
up among the trees; a party of horsemen passed; one--could it be the
voice of the subtle Frion?--said, "At the end of this glade we shall
see the abbey spires. Well I know the same; for when Queen
Margaret----"

This speaker was succeeded by a woman's voice: yet greater wonder, she
spoke in Spanish, in unforgotten accents--Richard's heart stood still,
as he heard them; but soon both voice and tramp of steeds grew faint;
and his brain, becoming more and more bewildered, allowed no thought to
enter, save the one fixed there even in delirium. The fugitives
continued to linger in this spot until it was probable that the
travellers should have arrived. True to the information they had
overheard, the forest opened at the end of the glade into a leafy
amphitheatre; an avenue was opposite, which led to the abbey gates,
whose Gothic spires, buttresses and carved arches, rose above the tufted
trees in dark masses. One end of the building was illuminated--that was
the church, and the pealing organ stole mournfully on the night,
sounding a Miserere; the chaunting of the monks mingled with the
harmonious swell, adding that pathos, that touch of solemn, unutterable
sentiment, which perhaps no music, save that of the human voice,
possesses. Richard's companions were rough-suited, vulgar-minded; but
they were Catholic and religious men, and were awe-struck by this voice
from heaven reaching them thus in their desolation; a voice promising
safety and repose to their harassed, wearied bodies.

A few steps carried them to the very spot; the bell was rung, the gate
was opened, sanctuary was claimed and afforded. Skelton sprang forward;
the other two hung back; but, on a sign from Richard, they also passed
the sacred threshold "Farewell, my friends," he said, "a short farewell.
Astley, I charge you wait for me. Sir priest, close the gate."

The word was said, the order obeyed, Richard was left alone in darkness.
"Now for my task--for my poor trusty fellows. The work of murder cannot
yet have begun: my life pays for all. Yet awhile bear me up, thou
fainting spirit; desert not Richard's breast till his honour be
redeemed!"

Vain prayer!--"I must repose," he thought; "it is of no avail to urge
nature beyond herself; a few minutes, and I am strong." He dismounted,
and, with a sensation of delicious relief, threw himself at his length
on the wet grass, pressing the dank herbage to his fevered brow. At
first he felt recovered; but in a few minutes strong spasms shot through
his frame; and these yielded to a feebleness, that forced him to sink to
the ground, when he endeavoured to rise: he forgot his situation, the
near abbey, his friends; he forgot wherefore, but he remembered that his
presence was required somewhere, and with a resolved effort he rose and
staggered towards his horse--he fell. "A little sleep, and I shall be
well." This was his last thought, and he lay in a state between slumber
and stupor upon the earth.




CHAPTER XLVIII

CAPTURE OF KATHERINE


     If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
     Injurious distance should not stop my way;
     For then, despite of space, I would be brought
     To limits far remote, where thou dost stay.

                                              SHAKSPEARE.


There is a terror whose cause is unrevealed even to its victim, which
makes the heart beat wildly, and we ask the voiceless thing wherefore;
when the beauty of the visible universe sickens the aching sense; when
we beseech the winds to comfort us, and we implore the Invisible for
relief, which is to speed to us from afar. We endeavour, in our impotent
struggle with the sense of coming evil, to soar beyond the imprisoning
atmosphere of our own identity; we call upon the stars to speak to us,
and would fain believe that mother earth, with inorganic voice,
prophesies. Driven on by the mad imaginings of a heart hovering between
life and death, we fancy that the visible frame of things is replete
with oracles. Or is it true; and do air and earth, divined by the
sorrow-tutored spirit, possess true auguries? At such dread hour we are
forced to listen and believe: nor can we ever afterwards, in common
life, forget our miserable initiation into the mysteries of the
unexplained laws of our nature. To one thus aware of the misfortune that
awaits her, the voice of consolation is a mockery. Yet, even while she
knows that the die is cast, she will not acknowledge her intimate
persuasion of ill; but sits smiling on any hope brought to her, as a
mother on the physician who talks of recovery while her child dies.

The Lady Katherine had yielded to Richard's wishes, because she saw that
he really desired her absence. Alone in a monastery, in a distant part
of Cornwall, she awaited the fatal tidings, which she knew must come at
last She was too clear-sighted not to be aware, that the armed power of
a mighty kingdom, such as England, must crush at once his ill-organized
revolt. She was prepared for, and ready to meet, all the disasters and
humiliations of defeat; but not to be absent from her husband at this
crisis. She ordered horses to be kept perpetually in readiness, that she
might proceed towards him on the first intimation of change and
downfall. She watched from the highest tower of her abode, the arrival
of messengers: before she dared open her letters, she read in their
faces, what news of Richard? It was a bitter pang to hear that
Plantagenet was dangerously wounded; that the prince had advanced
further forward, at the head of his rabble soldiers.

She had no friends, save humble ones, and very few of these: they
borrowed their looks from her, yet hoped more than she did. Quickly she
was aware of a change in them: they spoke in a low, subdued voice, as if
awe-struck by some visitation of destiny. That very day letters arrived
from the prince: they were of ancient date, nor could she lay his terms
of endearment and cheering to her heart and be consoled. In the
afternoon a torn, soiled billet was brought her from Edmund. In spite of
his wound, he had dragged himself as far as Launceston, on his way to
her. Forced to stop, he sent her tidings of all he knew--Richard's
mysterious flight, Henry's bloodless victory, the eagerness the king
expressed to learn where she was, and the despatching of troops in
search of her. He besought her to fly. It might be hoped that the prince
had escaped beyond sea, whither she must hasten; or falling into his
enemy's hands, she would never see him more.

Perplexed and agitated, knowing that dishonour would result from
Richard's strange disappearance, yet persuaded that he had some ulterior
view which it behoved her not to thwart, she hesitated what step to
take.

An incident occurred to end her uncertainty. Suddenly, in the evening,
Monina stood before her. Monina came with the safety-laden Adalid, to
bear her to the shores of Burgundy. She brought the history of the fraud
practised upon York, of the ambush laid for his life, of his escape, and
the arrival, immediately succeeding to hers, of his followers at the
Abbey of Beaulieu; how the pawing and trampling of a horse at the gates
had brought out the monks, who discovered the hapless prince senseless
on the dark sod. He was carried in, and through her care his name was
entered in the sanctuary. She had attended on his sick couch two days
and nights, when his first return to reason was to implore her to seek
Katherine, to carry her beyond Tudor's power, out of the island prison.
Her father's caravel was hovering on the coast. A favouring south-east
wind bore her to these shores: she came at his desire: the Adalid was
there, and she might sail, not to Burgundy, but even to the spot which
harboured Richard. She also could take sanctuary in Beaulieu.

The monastery in which the duchess of York had taken refuge was situated
on St. Michael's Mount, not far from the Land's End. The land projects
romantically into the sea, forming a little harbour called Mount's Bay.
Towards the land the acclivity is at first gradual, becoming precipitous
towards the summit: now, at high water, the tide flows between the rock
and the land, but it was in those days connected by a kind of natural,
rocky causeway. Towards the sea it is nearly perpendicular. A strong
fortress was connected with the church; and a stone lantern was attached
to one of the towers of the church. Not far from the castle, in a craggy
and almost inaccessible part of the cliff, is situated Saint Michael's
Chair, which, on account of its dangerous approach, and the traditions
attached to it, became the resort of the pious. Many a legend belonged
to this spot. Its thick woods, the hoar appearance of the crags, the
wide-spread sea, for ever warring against the land, which had thrust
itself out into the watery space, usurping a part of its empire, made it
singularly grand; while the placid beauty of the little bay formed by
the rock, and the picturesque grouping of the trees, the straggling
paths, and numerous birds, added every softer beauty to the scene.

Often did Katherine watch the changeful ocean, or turn her eyes to the
more grateful spectacle of umbrageous woods, and rifted rock, and seek
for peace in the sight of earth's loveliness. All weighed with tenfold
heaviness on her foreboding soul. For the first time, they wore to her
the aspect of beauty, when now she hoped to leave them. Hopes so soon to
fail. A south wind had borne the caravel swiftly into the bay, but the
breeze increased to a gale, and even while the ladies were making a few
hasty preparations, De Faro had been obliged to slip his moorings, and
run out to sea, to escape the danger of being wrecked on a lee shore.
With a pang of intense misery, Katherine saw its little hull hurry over
the blackening waters, and its single sail lose itself amidst the
sea-foam. The mariner had even, on anchoring, anticipated a storm; he
had informed his daughter of the probability there was, that he should
be driven to seek for safety in the open sea; but he promised with the
first favourable change of wind to return. When would this come? Fate
was in the hour, nor could even Katherine school herself to patience.

Evening shades gathering round them; the princess, growing each minute
more unquiet and miserable, sought in some kind of activity for relief
to her sufferings. "I will go to Saint Michael's Chair," she said; "good
spirits for ever hover near the sainted spot; they will hear and carry a
fond wife's prayer to the throne of the Eternal."

In silence Monina followed the lady. They were both mountain-bred, and
trod lightly along paths which seemed scarcely to afford footing to a
goat. They reached the seat of the rock; they looked over the sea, whose
dark surface was made visible by the sheets of foam that covered it; the
roar of waves was at their feet. The sun went down blood-red, and, in
its dying glories, the crescent moon showed first pale, then glowing;
the thousand stars rushed from among the vast clouds that blotted the
sky; and the wind tore fiercely round the crag, and howled among the
trees. O earth, and sea, and sky! strange mysteries! that look and are
so beautiful even in tumult and in storm; did ye feel pain then, when
the elements of which ye are composed battled together? Were ye tortured
by the strife of wind and wave, even as the soul of man when it is the
prey of passion? Or were ye unmoved, pain only being the portion of the
hearts of the two human beings, who, looking on the commotion, found
your wildest rage calm in comparison with the tempest of fear and grief
which had mastery over them.

Sickened by disappointment, impatient of despair, each remained,
brooding mutely over their several thoughts.

Poor Katherine; her dearest wish was set upon sharing in all its drear
minutiæ the fortune of her lord, her gallant knight, her most sweet
Richard. He was her husband; he had taken her, timid yet confiding,
from the shelter of her father's roof; they had entered the young
world of hope and hazard together. Custom, the gentle weaver
of soft woman's tenderness, had thrown its silken net over her;
his disasters became hers; his wishes, and their defeat, were
also hers. She only existed as a part of him; while enthusiastic
love made her fondly cling even to the worst that betided, as
better in its direst shape than any misnamed good fortune that
unlinked them.

"My love, my altar-plighted love! must I then wake and say no good day
to thee; and sleep, my rest unbenisoned by thy good night! The simple
word, the we, that symbolized our common fate, cut in two, each half a
nothing so disjoined."

While Katherine thus struggled with necessity, Monina was given up to
patience. The present hour had fulfilled its fear; her busy thoughts
fashioned a thousand plans for his escape, or tremblingly painted a dark
futurity. He was a part of her being, though no portion of herself was
claimed by him. She was not his, as a lover or a wife, but as a sister
might be; if in this ill world such heart's concord could exist: a
sharing of fate and of affection, combined with angelic purity. As
easily might she fancy animal life to survive in her body after the soul
had fled, as soon imagine that the beating of her heart could continue
when the living impulse which quickened its palpitations was still, as
that he, her childhood's playfellow, the golden dream of her youth, the
shrine at which she had sacrificed that youth, should die, and she live
on in the widowed world without him.

The stars glittered over their gentle heads, and the moon went down in
the west; fitful, thread-like rays were shed upon the raging sea, whose
heady billows foamed and roared at their feet: both these fair, gentle
creatures remained, careless of the wild wind that swept their limbs, or
the spray which, high as they stood, besprent their hair: both young,
both lovely, both devoted to one, yet confiding in the reality of virtue
and purity, trusting fully each other, the one accepting the heart's
sacrifice which the other unreservedly made, they watched for the
Adalid, which, a plaything of the waves, was carried afar. Day dawned
before they could resolve to quit this spot; then they took refuge in
the near monastery, and from its towers looked out over the sea.

A few anxious hours brought the dreaded consummation of their fears. The
ascent of a troop of horse up the steep, told Katherine that she was
discovered. Their sudden appearance before her proved that she was a
prisoner. For the first time she saw the White and Red Rose entwined;
the earl of Oxford was announced to her as their leader, and he soon
appeared to claim his prize.

Katherine received him with dignified sweetness; she conquered her ill
fate by smiling at its blows, and looked a queen, as she yielded herself
a slave. The watching of the night had all disordered her dress, and
deranged her golden tresses; but her wondrous fairness, the soft
moulding of her face, her regal throat, and arched open brow, bending
over her intelligent, yet soft, blue eyes; her person majestic, even in
its slim beauty, were tokens of a spirit, that in destitution must reign
over all who approached it.

Her first words, to ease the awe-struck earl, were an entreaty to be
conducted to the king. She showed more earnest desire than he to present
herself to her royal victor. In a very few hours they had descended the
Mount, and hastened out of hearing of the roar of the ocean, which had
so cruelly deceived her hopes. In her eyes could only be read the
mastery she had obtained over her thoughts; no lurking weakness betrayed
fear, or even disappointment, Surely yet she cherished some dear
expectation; yet how, lost to liberty, could she hope to attain it?

But thus we are, while untamed by years. Youth, elastic and bright,
disdains to be compelled. When conquered, from its very chains it forges
implements for freedom; it alights from one baffled flight, only again
to soar on untired wing towards some other aim. Previous defeat is made
the bridge to pass the tide to another shore; and, if that break down,
its fragments become stepping-stones. It will feed upon despair, and
call it a medicine which is to renovate its dying hopes.




CHAPTER XLIX

RICHARD SURRENDERS


     For, when Cymocles saw the foul reproach
     Which him appeached, prick'd with noble shame
     And inward grief, he fiercely 'gan approach;
     Resolved to put away that loathly blame,
     Or die with honour and desert of fame.

                                            SPENSER.


After the prince, by the voyage of Monina, had, as he hoped, provided
for the escape and safety of the Lady Katherine, he could not, all weak
as he was, remain in repose.

From his early childhood he had been nurtured in the idea that it was
his first, chief duty to regain his kingdom; his friends lived for that
single object; all other occupation was regarded as impertinent or
trifling. On the table of his ductile boyish mind, that sole intent was
deeply engraved by every hand or circumstance. The base-minded
disposition of his rival king adorned his cause with a show of use and
the name of virtue.

Those were days when every noble-born youth carved honour for himself
with his sword; when passes at arms where resorted to whenever real wars
did not put weapons in their hands, and men exposed their breasts to
sharp-biting steel in wanton sport. Often during his green and budding
youth Richard had gloried in the very obstacles set before him; to be
cast out and forced to redeem his state, was a brighter destiny than to
be lapped in the bosom of guarded royalty. The treason of Clifford and
the sacrifice of devoted friends but whetted his ambition; vengeance,
the religion of that age, being a sacred duty in his eyes. He had been
shaken by Lord Surrey's appeal, but cast the awakened pity off as a
debasing weakness.

The painted veil of life was torn. His name had not armed the nobles of
his native land, his cause had not been trumpeted with praise nor
crowned by victory; deserted by foreign allies, unsuccessful in Ireland,
he had appeared at the head of a rabble army strong only in wrongs and
in revenge. Even these he had abandoned, and with nameless hinds taken
sanctuary; his story was a fable, his name a jeer; he no longer, so it
seemed, existed; for the appellation of duke of York was to be lost and
merged in the disgraceful misnomer affixed to him by the Usurper.

Richard was no whining monk to lament the inevitable, and tamely to
await the result. To see an evil was to spur him to seek a remedy: he
had given up every expectation of reigning, except such as sprung from
his right, and faith in the justice of God. But honour was a more valued
treasure; and to his warm heart dearer still was the safety of the poor
fellows abandoned by him. On the third day after his arrival at
Beaulieu, he arose from his sick couch, donned his armour, and, yet pale
and feeble, sent to speak with the cavalier who commanded the party that
guarded all egress from the abbey. With him he held long parley, in
conclusion of which Sir Hugh Luttrel directed three of his followers to
be in readiness, and two of his chosen horses to be led to the abbey
gates. Richard took leave of the abbot; he recommended his poor
followers to him, and lightly answered the remonstrance of the holy man,
who thought that delirium alone could urge the fugitive to quit the
tranquil, sacred spot, where he himself passed his days in quiet, and
which held out so secure a protection to the vanquished. His
remonstrance was vain; one word weighed more with Richard than a
paradise of peace. Infamy, dishonour! No; even if his people were
safe--by throwing himself in the self-same peril to which he had
apparently exposed them, that stain were effaced. The very gentleman to
whom he had surrendered himself had trespassed on his allegiance to
Henry to dissuade him from the fool-hardihood of his adventure. It was a
sight of pity to see one so very young walk voluntarily to the
sacrifice; and the princely mien and youthful appearance of the
self-constituted prisoner wrought all to compassion and respect. For
still this fair White Rose was in the very opening flower of manhood: he
looked, after such variety of fortune, as if evil not only never had,
but never could tarnish the brightness of his spirit or of his aspect;
illness had a little enfeebled him, without detracting from his youthful
beauty, giving rather that softness which made it loveliness, yet
painted fairer by his self-immolating resolve.


     "A sweet regard and amiable grace,
      Mixed with manly sternness did appear,"


and eagerness withal: for eager he was, even to almost foolish haste, to
redeem the lost hours, and establish himself again no runaway.

With fresh joy he addressed himself to retrace his steps to Taunton.
Sanctuary and refuge from death--oh! how he trampled on the slavish
thought. Death was to him a word, a shadow, a phantom to deride and
scorn, not an enemy to grapple with; disgrace was his abhorred foe, and
him he thus overthrew. His resolves, inspired by disdain of permitting
one taint to blemish his career, were not the expedients of prudence,
but the headlong exploit of daring youth. The iron must indeed have
entered our souls, and we be tamed from dear, youthful freedom to age's
humble concessions to necessity, before we can bow our head to calumny,
smile at the shafts as they rankle in our flesh, and calmly feel that,
among the many visitations of evil we undergo, this is one we are
compelled to endure.

Thus he, his gentle guide and followers, travelled towards Taunton. In
all prudence, from the moment they left sanctuary, Sir Hugh Luttrel
ought to have guarded him closely. But even the staid Sir Hugh forgot
this duty; rather was Richard the enforcer of this journey, than his
guard, Richard it was who at night halted unwillingly; Richard who first
cried to horse at morning's dawn; who, in spite of ill-weather, resisted
every delay. As they drew near their bourne, the appellation of Perkin
first met the prince's ear; he was unaware that it had ever been applied
to him except by Henry's written proclamations. It acted as a galling
spur; for he believed, with youth's incapacity of understanding
systematized falsehood, that his presence would put to flight the
many-coloured web of invention, which his rival had cast over him to mar
his truth and obscure his nobility.

After three days they drew near Taunton. The stubble fields, the flowery
hedges, the plenteous orchards were passed. From a rising ground they
looked upon the walls of the town, and the vacant moor where his camp
had stood. Richard halted, saying--"Sir knight, I will await you
here--do you seek your king: say, I come a voluntary sacrifice, to
purchase with drops of my royal blood the baser tide of my poor
followers. I demand no more--bid him rear the scaffold; let the
headsman sharpen the axe, to lop off the topmost bough of Plantagenet.
The price I ask, is the despised lives of men, who, but that they loved
me, were incapable of merit or of crime in his eyes. For their humble
sakes, like my grandfather York, I am prepared to die. If pledge of this
be denied me, I still am free. I wear a sword and will sell my life
dearly, though alone."

Sir Hugh Luttrel was perplexed. He knew the stern nature of his royal
master, and how heavily he would visit on him any disappointment in his
dearest wish of obtaining possession of his rival's person. The prince
had, during their three days' companionship, gained great power over
him: he felt that he was in truth the son of Edward the Fourth, a man he
had never loved (for Sir Hugh was a Lancastrian), but one whom he had
feared and obeyed as his sovereign. How could he put slavish
force upon his gallant offspring? He hesitated, till the prince
demanded--"Wherefore delay--is there aught else that you desire?"

"You pledge your knightly word," said Sir Hugh, "not to desert this
spot?"

"Else wherefore am I here?--this is idle. Yet, so to content you, I
swear by my vow made under the walls of Granada, by our Lady, and by the
blessed saints, I will abide here."

The knight rode into the town with his followers, leaving young Richard
impatient for the hour that was to deliver him to servitude.

Sir Hugh first sought Lord Dawbeny, requesting him to obtain for him
instant audience of the king. "His grace," said the noble, "is at
vespers, or about to attend them."

"I dare not wait till they are said," replied Luttrel, who every minute
felt the burthen of responsibility weighing heavier on him.

"Nor I interrupt his majesty--even now he enters the church."

In haste Sir Hugh crossed the street; and, as the king took the holy
water from the chalice, he knelt before him. The few words he spoke
painted Henry's face with exulting gladness. "We thank thee, good Sir
Hugh," he said, "and will make our thanks apparent. By the mass, thou
hast deserved well of us this day! Where hast thou bestowed our
counterfeit?"

"Please your majesty, he awaits your highness's acceptance of his
conditions without the eastern gate."

"You have placed strong guard over him?"

"He pledged his oath to await my return. He is alone."

A dark, angry frown chased all glee from Tudor's brow; bending a stern
glance on his erewhile welcome messenger, he commanded Lord Wells, his
cousin, to take a strong force and to seize this duke of Runaways. Sir
Hugh, timid as he was, interfered: driven by respect for his prisoner,
and fear of what might ensue, he tried to enforce York's stipulation.
Henry looked on him with scorn, then said, "Truly, cousin, I have
vaunted of a bloodless conquest; so let not the blood of the misborn
traitor stain our laurels, nor Sir Luttrel's Duke Perkin shed one
precious ruby drop. Say ay to all he asks; for, as it seems, his demands
are as foolish as himself, and need no chaffering. Tell him that his
life is safe, but bring him here; set him within our ward and
limitation: do this, while we with a Te Deum thank our Heavenly Father
for his watchful mercies. Sir Hugh, accompany our cousin, and then wend
your way whither it please you. We have no pleasure in your presence."

Thus duped, even by his own generous, proud spirit, the duke of York
became a prisoner--delivering up his sword, and yielding himself an
easy prey to his glad victor. Once, twice, thrice, as he waited the
return of Luttrel, it had crossed his mind, not to fly, his vow being
pledged, but to remember that he was now free and unconstrained, and
would soon be in other's thrall--when farewell to the aspiring thought,
the deed of arms, and to the star of his life, to whose idea, now his
purpose was accomplished, he fondly turned!--"Poor Katherine," he
whispered, "this is the crown, the fated, fallen youth, the seer
foretold." In after-times that scene dwelt on his memory; he called to
mind the evening-tide, for the sun was down, and the clouds, lately gold
besprent, waxing dun, as the town walls grew high and dark, and the few
trees about him waved fitfully in a soft breeze; that wind was free, and
could career over the plain; what spell bound the noble knight and
stalwart steed, that they coursed not also free as it?

In a few minutes he was a prisoner--and led within those darksome
walls. At first, treated with some observance, he was unaware, as is the
case in any new position, with whose circumstances and adjuncts we are
unacquainted, how utterly he had fallen. He was led to no barred prison;
and, for a time, the nobles and knights who flocked, to see him were no
bad exchange for the motley crew he had quitted. But, as if in a dream,
he felt gather round him impalpable but adamantine walls--chains hung
upon his limbs, not the less heavy, because the iron pierced his soul
rather than his flesh. He had been a free man; his name was attended
with love and respect, and his aspect commanded the obedience of men.
Now, the very appellation given to him was a mortal insult; a stranger
seemed to be spoken to when he was addressed, and yet he must answer. He
was never alone; and night was the sole suspension from the insulting
curiosity of the crowd. He must forego himself; grow an impostor in his
own eyes; take on him the shameful name of Perkin: all which native
honour, and memory of his princess bride, made trebly stinging.

To barb the dart came intelligence that the Lady Katherine was a
prisoner. King Henry had quitted Taunton, and gone towards Exeter, when,
on his arrival there, the earl of Oxford presented the Scottish princess
to him. Praises of her wondrous beauty became rife, brought by some of
the king's train, returned to Taunton; praises so excessive and warm as
could not have been inspired by celestial beauty in adversity, if not
egged on by some adventitious stimulant. It was the fashion to speak of
her as the Queen of Loveliness; as (for beauty's sake the name belonged
to her) the fairest White Rose that ever grew on thorny bush. By this
name she was mentioned to York; and it visited his heart as the first
gleam of sunshine on his enshadowed misery; dear was the name of the
White Rose to the fallen one. It had been his own in fresh and happy
days, when first he showed his prowess among the knights of France and
Burgundy. Still louder grew the echo of some mighty voice, that gave
forth encomium of the prisoner's bride; and the smiles with which some
spoke, smiles half of wonder half of mockery, told of some secret charm,
which at last was openly commented upon. "Again the king saw the fair
one yestermorn; and dallied ere he granted the earnest suit she made, as
if he loved to be entreated."

"The grave King Henry caught in the net of the wanton boy! Oh, this were
subject for a ballad for the nonce."

"Blythe news for gentle Perkin; his wife thrives at court. She takes
occasion by too slender a hold, if she raise not her husband from the
kitchen to a higher place at court."

"Now we shall see our the lady the queen jealous of her liege."

"Our queen? what midsummer's dream is this? The White Rose will never
flower in our court garden."

To falsify this assertion came the next day a messenger, with command to
convey the noble prisoner with all speed to London; and for the
attendance of the Lady Cheney, and the Lady Howard, two noble matrons,
to wait on the Lady Katherine, who was about to proceed to Westminster.
Smiles and whispers were interchanged; and, when to this was added, that
as much courtesy should be shown the counterfeit youth as might not
endanger his safe keeping, the light laugh followed; though, as if to
meet and overthrow the raillery, it was added, this was ordered for his
royal wife's sake, who was cousin to England's dear ally, the king of
Scotland. These idle tales did not reach York's ear: wherever he showed
himself, he enforced such personal respect, that there was no likelihood
that any conjecture, linked with his lady's name, would be hazarded
before him. He was told that the king entertained her royally; and when
he heard that she was to be presented to his sister, the Queen
Elizabeth, a thrill of joy passed into his heart. His sister! as a boy,
he remembered the fair, kind girl, whom he had called his loved and most
sweet sister: he knew that she was conscious of his truth, and, though
wedded to his rival, loved not her lord. It was a pleasing dream, to
fancy these gentle ladies together; to know that, while the one spoke
her affection and praise, the other must feel the kindred blood warm in
her heart, and proudly, though sadly, acknowledge him her worthy
brother.




CHAPTER L

A PROCESSION


         They are noble sufferers. I marvel
     How they'd have looked, had they been victors, that
     With such a constant nobility enforce
     A freedom out of bondage.

                                       TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.


The vulgar rabble, fond of any sort of show, were greedy of this new
one. In all parts the name of the duke of York, of the counterfeit
Perkin, drew a concourse of gazers. The appetite was keenest in London;
and many a tawdry masque and mime was put in motion, to deck the streets
through which the defeated youth was to pass. Vainly; he entered London
at night, and was conducted privately to Westminster. What strange thing
was this? What mark of reality did his very forehead wear, that Henry,
so prodigal of contumely on his foes, dared not bring him forward for
the public gaze? One man was put in the stocks for a similar remark; and
on the following day it was suddenly proclaimed, that Perkin would go in
procession from Westminster to Saint Paul's, and back again. A troop of
horse at the appointed hour left the palace: in the midst of them rode a
fair young gentleman, whose noble mien and gallant bearing gave lustre
to his escort: his sweet aspect, his frank soft smile and lively but
calm manner, had no trace of constraint or debasement, "He is
unarmed--is that Perkin? No, the earl of Warwick--he is a prince
sure--yet that is he!" Such murmurs sped around; at some little
distance followed another burlesque procession; a poor fellow, a
Cornishman, was tied to an ass, his face to the tail, and the beast now
proceeding lazily, now driven by sticks, now kicking, now galloping,
made an ill-fashioned mirth for the multitude. Whether, as York was not
to be disgraced in his own person, the contumely was to reach him
through this poor rogue, or whether the eyes of men were to be drawn
from him to the rude mummery which followed, could only be guessed: the
last was the effect produced. Richard heard mass at Saint Paul's, and
returned to Westminster unmolested by insult. It seemed but as if some
young noble made short pilgrimage from one city to the other, to
accomplish a vow. The visit of ill-fated Warwick to the cathedral,
before the battle of Stoke, had more in it of humiliating ostentation.

He returned to the palace of Westminster. A few weeks he spent in
mingled curiosity and anxiety concerning his future destiny. It was
already accomplished. Modern times could not present anything more
regular and monotonous than the way of life imposed upon him. It was
like the keeping of a lunatic, who, though now sane, might be
momentarily expected to break out in some dangerous explosion, rather
than the confining of a state-prisoner. Four armed attendants, changed
every eight hours, constantly guarded him, never moving, according to
the emphatic language of the old chroniclers, the breadth of a nail from
his side. He attended early mass each morning: he was permitted to take
one hour's ride on every evening that was not a festival. Two large
gloomy chambers, with barred windows, were allotted him. Among his
guards, he quickly perceived that the same faces seldom appeared; and
the most rigorous silence, or monosyllabic discourse, was imposed upon
them. Harsher measures were perhaps spared, from respect to his real
birth, or his alliance with the king of Scotland: yet greater severity
had been less tantalizing. As it was, the corpse in the grass-grown
grave was not more bereft of intercourse with the sunny world, than the
caged duke of York. From his windows, he looked upon a deserted
court-yard; in his rides, purposely directed to unfrequented spots, he
now and then saw a few human beings--such name could be hardly bestowed
on his stony-faced, stony-hearted guards.

Richard was the very soul of sympathy; he could muse for hours in
solitude, but it must be upon dear argument, that had for its subject
the pleasures, interests or affections of others. He could not entertain
a heartless intercourse. Wherever he saw the human countenance, he
beheld a fellow-creature; and, duped a thousand times, and a thousand
times deceived, "still he must love." To spend the hour in sportive
talk; fondly to interchange the gentle offices of domestic life; to meet
peril and endure misery with others; to give away himself, and then
return to his inner being, laden like a bee with gathered sweets: to
pile up in his store-house, memory, the treasured honey of friendship
and love, and then away to nestle in the bosom of his own dear flower,
and drink up more, or gaily to career the golden fields; such was his
nature: and now--this was worse loneliness; this commune with the mutes
of office; to be checked by low-born men; to feel that he must obey the
beck of an hireling. A month, interspersed with hopes of change, he had
endured the degradation; now he began to meditate escape. Yet he paused.
Where was Katherine? where his many zealous friends?

The Lady Katherine was in an apartment of the palace, whose arched and
fretted roof, and thick buttresses, were well adapted to impart a
feeling of comfortable seclusion from the rough elements without. The
dulness of dark November was gladdened by a huge wood fire. The little
prince of Wales was narrating some strange story of fairyland; and bluff
Harry was setting two dogs to quarrel, and then beating his favourite
for not conquering, which seeing, his sister Margaret drew the animal
from him to console and caress it. The gentle queen bent over her
embroidery. Listening she was to her favourite Arthur, interrupting him
with playful questions and exclamations, while Katherine now kindly
attended to the boy, now turned anxiously at every sound. She rose at
last: "Surely vespers are ringing from the abbey. My lord the king
promised to see me before vespers."

"My lord the king is very gracious to you, sweet one," said Elizabeth.

"Methinks by nature he is gracious," replied the princess; "at least, I
have ever found him so. Surely the shackles of state are very heavy, or
ere this he would have granted my prayer, which he has listened to so
oft indulgently."

The queen smiled faintly, and again pursued her work with seeming
earnestness. Was it jealousy that dimmed the silk of her growing rosebud
by a tear--or what name shall we give to the feeling?--envy we may not
call it, she was too sweetly good--which now whispered, "Even he, the
cold, the stern, is kind to her; my brother loves her passionately; and
many a lance has been broken for her. Happy girl; happy in adversity;
while I, England's miserable queen, am forgotten even by my
fellow-prisoner of Sheriff Hutton, poor Warwick! he might have been my
refuge: for the rest, how hard and rocky seem all human hearts to me."
Her tears now flowed fast. Katherine saw them: she approached her,
saying, "Dear and royal lady, none should weep, methinks, but only I,
whose mate is caged and kept away; none sigh but poor Kate, whose more
than life hangs on state policy; or is it for _him_ these tears are shed?"

Still Elizabeth wept. Accustomed to the excess of self-restraint, timid,
schooled to patience, but with the proud, fiery spirit of a Plantagenet,
tamed, not dead within her, she could be silent, but not speak by
halves. The very natural vivacity of her nature made her disdain not to
have her will, when once it was awaked. She struggled against her rising
feeling; she strove to suppress her emotion; but at last she spoke; and
once again, after the ten years that had elapsed since her mother's
imprisonment, truth was imaged by her words. To none could she have
addressed herself better. The life of the Scottish princess had been
spent in administering balm to wounded minds: the same soft eloquence,
the same persuasive counsels, that took the sting of remorse from her
royal cousin's conscience, was spent upon the long-hidden sorrows of the
neglected wife, the humbled woman. From her own sensitive mind she
culled the knowledge which taught her where and how peace and
resignation were to be found. The piety that mingled with her talk was
the religion of love; her philosophy was mere love; and it was the
spirit of love, now kindling the balmy atmosphere of charity to many,
now concentred in one point, but ever ready to soothe human suffering
with its soft influence, that dwelt upon her lips, and modulated her
silver voice. Elizabeth felt as if she had wandered long in a
wolf-haunted wild, now suddenly changed to a fairy demesne, fresh and
beautiful as poet's dream. Timidly she feared to set her untaught feet
within the angel-guarded precincts. The first effect of her new friend's
eloquence was to make her speak. After years of silence, to utter her
very inner thoughts, her woman's fears, her repinings, her aversions,
her lost hopes and affections crushed: she spent her bitterest words;
but thus it was as if she emptied a silver chalice of its gall, to be
refilled by Katherine with heavenly dew.

The weeks of baffled expectation grew into months. It is a dreary
portion of our existence, when we set our hearts upon an object which
recedes as we approach, and yet entices us on. The kings courtesy and
smiles, and evident pleasure in her society, gave birth to warm hopes in
the bosom of the princess. She had asked to share her husband's prison;
she had besought to be permitted to see him; it seemed, from Henry's
vague but consolatory answers, that to-morrow she would receive even
more than her desires. The disappointment of the morrow, which she
lamented bitterly at first, then grew into the root whence fresh hopes
sprang again, to be felled by the cruel axe, again to shoot forth: the
sickening sensation of despair crept over her sometimes; her very
struggles to master it enfeebled her; and yet she did conquer all but
the hard purposes of the tyrant. Now a messenger was to be despatched to
Scotland; now he expected one thence; now an embassy from Burgundy: he
implored her patience, and talked back the smiles into her saddened
countenance. He was almost sincere at first, not in his excuses, but in
his desire to please her at any sacrifice; but this disinterested wish
grew soon into a mere grasping at self-gratification. In a little while
he hoped she would be persuaded how vain it was to expect that he should
set free so dangerous a rival: and yet he did not choose to extinguish
all her anticipations; for perhaps then she would desire to return to
her native country; and Henry would have sacrificed much to keep her
where he could command her society. Thus he encouraged her friendship
with the queen, though he wondered how one so wise, so full of
reflection and reason as Katherine, could love his feeble-minded wife.

The king underrated the talents of Elizabeth. This hapless woman had
perceived that contention was useless; she therefore conceded everything
without a struggle. Her energies, spent upon endurance, made her real
strength of mind seem tameness; but Katherine read with clearer eyes. We
are all and each of us riddles, when unknown one to the other. The plain
map of human powers and purposes, helps us not at all to thread the
labyrinth each individual presents in his involution of feelings,
desires, and capacities; and we must resemble, in quickness of feeling,
instinctive sympathy, and warm benevolence, the lovely daughter of
Huntley, before we can hope to judge rightly of the good and virtuous
among our fellow-creatures.

The strangest sight of all was to see Henry act a lover's part. At first
he was wholly subdued,


     "So easy is t' appease the stormy wind
     Of malice, in the calm of pleasant womankind."


Even generosity and magnanimity, disguises he sometimes wore the better
to conceal his inborn littleness of soul, almost possessed him; for a
moment he forgot his base exultation in crushing a foe, and for a moment
dwelt with genuine pleasure on the reflection, that it was in his power
to gratify her every wish, and to heap benefits on one so lovely and so
true. When first she was presented to him, in all the calm majesty of
her self-conquering mood, her stainless loveliness had such effect, that
surely he could deny her nothing; and when she asked that no foul
dishonour should be put upon her lord, he granted almost before she
asked: his expressions of service and care were heartfelt; and she lost
every fear as she listened. When custom, which, with man, is the
devourer of holy enthusiasm, changed his purer feelings into something
he dared not name, he continued to manifest the same feelings, which had
bested him so well at first, and to angle with his prey. Though he
scarcely knew what he wished, for a thousand worldly motives sufficed to
check any dishonourable approach, it was enough that she was there;
that, when she saw him, her countenance lighted up with pleasure; that
with the sweetest grace she addressed her entreaties to his ear; not in
abrupt demands, but in such earnest prayer, such yielding again, to
return with another and another argument; that often he thought, even if
he had wished to concede, he would hold out a little longer, that still
her sweet voice might address him, still her stately neck be bent
imploring as she fixed her blue eyes on him.

It was very long before the artless girl suspected that he had any other
intent but to consent at last to her supplications. As it was as easy to
him to lure her on with a greater as a lesser hope, she even fancied
that, under certain restrictions, York's freedom might be restored; and
that with him, in some remote country, she might bless Tudor as a
generous adversary. Elizabeth was afraid to discover the truth to her,
for she also dreaded to lose her, and was afraid that, on the failure of
her hopes, she would seek to return to Scotland; or at least seclude
herself from her husband's jailor. Monina first awoke her to the truth.
Monina, who had been to Brussels, to consult with the Duchess Margaret
and Lady Brampton, and who came back full of projects for her friend's
escape, heard with amazement and scorn the false lures held out by
Henry; she impatiently put aside every inducement for delay, and with
rash, but determined zeal, framed many a scheme for communicating with
him, and contriving means for his flight.

He himself--the chained eagle--was sick at heart. No word--no
breath--no hope! Had all forgotten him? Was he, yet living, erased from
the lists of memory? Cut off from the beloved beings in whom he had
confided, through their own act--no longer a part of their thoughts,
their lives, themselves? Stood he alone in this miserable world,
allied to it by hate only--the hate borne to him by his foe?
Such gloomy misgivings were so alien to his nature, that they
visited him as cruel iron torture visits soft human flesh. That
she--the life of his life, should be false and cold! Each friend
forgetful--Monina--Plantagenet--all--all! Oh, to stretch his
quivering frame upon burning coals, had been to slumber on a bed of
roses, in comparison with the agony these thoughts administered. His
calmer moods, when he believed that, though tardy, they were true, were
scarcely less painful. Then the real state of things grew more galling:
the bluntness or silence of his keepers; their imperturbable or rude
resistance to his questions; the certainty that if one answered
graciously--that one he should see no more. Often he felt as if he
could not endure his present position one hour longer. Fits of hope,
meditations on escape, chequered his days; so that all was not so
dark--but the transition from one emotion to another, each to end in
blank despair, tasked his mercurial soul. Patience died within him--he
might perish in the attempt, but he would be free.

Urged by Monina, by her own awakening fears, and above all by the keen
burning desire of her heart, the Lady Katherine became very importunate
with the crafty monarch to be permitted an interview with her lord.
Henry was in no mood to grant her request: the thousand designs he had
meditated to disgrace his victim, he had given up for her sake, because
he would not refuse himself the pleasure of seeing her, and feared to
behold aversion and horror mark an aspect hitherto all smiles towards
him. The same fear, nurtured by the expressions of her tender affection,
made him hesitate, ere he should endeavour to convince her that she had
misallied herself to an impostor. Indeed, when at last he ventured to
frame a speech bearing such a meaning, her answer told him, that if he
could have changed the Royal York into base-born Perkin, the young and
innocent wife would still cling to him to whom she had pledged her rows;
to whom she had given himself; whose own, in Heaven's and her own eyes,
she unalienably was. But now Henry, grown more callous as time elapsed,
coined a new scheme, vile as his own soul: he resolved, by acting on her
woman's fears, tenderness, and weakness, to make her the instrument of
persuading her lord to some damning confession, that must stamp him as a
deceiver for ever. This bright project animated him to fresh endeavours
to please, and her with fresh hopes; yet he paused a little before he
sought to execute it.

Winter crept on into spring, and spring ripened into summer, and still
the various actors in this tragic drama were spending their lives, their
every thought and heart's pulsation on one object. Richard had latterly
received intimation that he would be permitted an interview with his
beloved White Rose; and a week or two more were patiently endured with
this expectation. Katherine each day believed, that on the morrow she
should see him, whom now she conversed with only in her nightly dreams,
and woke each morning to find him fled with them. Some change
approached: Henry's promises became more clear in their expression; his
assertions more peremptory: he would at last name his conditions, which
she was to communicate to her lord; even Elizabeth almost dared to hope.
Monina alone, deeply impressed with a belief in the malice of Tudor, was
incredulous, and reluctantly yielded to Katherine's request to suspend
yet a little while her plots.

Whitsuntide arrived, and Henry at last would decide. This estival was to
be spent at Shene: thither the royal family went, accompanied by the
princess, who vanquished her disappointment at further delay, not to
appear an ingrate to the fair-promising king. Indeed, in the secure hope
she cherished of again seeing him who was her earthly paradise, she
smiled through the very heart-gushing tears expectation caused to flow.
On Whit Sunday she awoke, resolving to discard the heavy load of
anticipated evil that involuntarily weighed at her heart. She knelt at
mass, and fervently strove to resign her dearest wishes to the direction
of her God; and yet that she should see him again soon--oh! how very
soon,--filled her with such dizzy rapture, that her orisons were forgot
midway--remembered, and turned to thanksgivings--till she recollected
that still her hope was unfulfilled; and fear awoke, and with tears and
prayer she again strove to ease her agitated heart.

That very night a thunder-storm roused her from slumber: with those
unexplained emotions, which, in fateful periods, make so large a portion
of our lives, she felt as if every clap spoke audibly some annunciation
which she could not interpret: as if every lurid flash were sent to
disclose a sight which yet she could not see. At length the rain ceased,
the thunder grew distant, the lightning faint; a load was lifted from
her soul; she slept, with the firm belief that on the morrow tidings,
not all evil, would be brought from London.

Some tidings surely came. What they were she was not permitted to know.
For the first time Henry made her a real prisoner; she was carefully
guarded, and none were allowed to speak to her. Overwrought by her
expectations, this seemed a frightful cruelty; and yet, where caution
was used, there must be fear: her--his enemy feared--then good had
occurred. She dared not permit her imagination to picture forth the
thing which yet was for ever present to it; and, while all else were
amazed to hear that York had escaped and fled, his lovely, anxious wife,
cut off from communication with all, knew only that she alone was
ignorant of what she would have given her life to learn.




CHAPTER LI

AN ESCAPE


     Thou, God of winds, that reignest in the seas,
       That reignest also in the continent,
     At last blow up some gentle gale of ease,
       The which may bring my ship, ere it be rent,
       Unto the gladsome port of her intent.

                                              SPENSER.


During the winter and the untoward late spring, Richard had endured his
captivity. The warm happy summer season, calling all nature to a
jubilee, at first saddened, then animated him to contrive new projects
of escape. The promised interview with his White Rose tempted him to
delay; while an inner spirit rebelled even against this dear enticement,
and bade him fly.

On the evening of the ninth of June, he was permitted to attend vespers
in a secluded chapel of Westminster Abbey. During the short passage from
the palace to the cathedral, it seemed to him as if a new life were
awake everywhere; an unknown power, on the eve of liberating him. Never
before had he prayed so fervently for freedom: the pealing organ, the
dim arched venerable vault above, acted as stimulants to his roused and
eager soul; he stood tiptoe, as on the eve of the accomplishment of his
desire.

A deep and awful sound suddenly shook the building; a glaring, lurid
flash, filled with strange brilliancy the long, dark aisle. A clap of
thunder, loud, and swiftly repeated, reverberated along the heavens;
the shrill scream of women answered the mighty voice. The priest who
read the service, saw his sacred book glared on by so keen a flash, as
blinded him to the dimmer light that succeeded. Every being in the
church sank on their knees, crossing themselves, and striving to repeat
their Paternosters and Aves; while Richard stood fearless, enjoying the
elemental roar, exulting in the peal, the flash, the tempestuous havock,
as powers yet rebellious to his conqueror. Freedom was victorious in the
skyey plains; there was freedom in the careering clouds, freedom in the
sheeted lightning, freedom in the cataract of sound that tore its way
along. On his poor heart, sick of captivity, and enforced obedience, the
sweet word liberty hung as a spell: every bird and tiny fly he had
envied as being free; how much more things more powerful, the chainless
destructions of nature. The voice of God speaking in his own consecrated
abode was terrible to all; soothing to himself alone. He walked to the
southern entrance of the edifice to mark the splashing shower, as it
ploughed the stones: two of his keepers remained on their knees,
paralyzed by terror; the two others followed trembling. At that moment a
louder, a far, far louder clap burst right above them, succeeding so
instantaneously the blinding flash, that, while every object was wrapped
inflame, the pavement and fretted roof of the abbey shook with the
sound. A bolt had fallen; the priest at the altar was struck; with
mingled horror and curiosity one of York's remaining guards rushed
towards the spot; the only remaining one was kneeling in an agony of
terror. York stood on the threshold of the porch; he advanced a few
steps beyond; a new fear possessed the fellow. "He will
escape!--halloo!--James!--Martin!" The very words imparted the
thought to the prince, who filled erewhile with wonder and religious
awe, had forgotten his own sad plight. He turned to the man, who was
doubtful whether to rush into the chapel for his comrades, or singly to
seize his prisoner--his dagger was drawn. "Put up that foolish steel,"
said York, "it cannot harm one whom God calls to freedom--listen, he
speaks;--farewell!" The lightning again flashed; with blue and forked
flame it ran along the blade of the weapon raised against him; with a
shriek the man dashed it to the earth. Richard was already out of sight.

The rain poured in torrents: it came down in continuous cataracts from
the eaves of the houses. On this sunny festival few had remained at
home; and those, terror-stricken now, were on their knees; no creature
was in the streets as the fugitive sped on, ignorant whither he should
go. London was a vast, unknown labyrinth to him: as well as he could
divine, he directed his flight eastward, and that with such velocity,
that he might compete with a horse in full career. If any saw him, as
thus with winged heels he flew along, they did not wonder that a person
should hasten to shelter out of the storm. It was of slight regard to
him that rain and hail ploughed the earth, and continued thunder echoed
through the sky; that alone and friendless he fled through the streets
of his victor's chief city. His exulting heart, his light, glad spirit
told him that he was free; if for a few minutes only, he would joyfully
purchase with his life those few minutes' emancipation from his
frightful thraldom. No words could speak, no thought image the supreme
gladness of that moment.

Meanwhile, dark night, aided by the thick clouds which still poured down
torrents of rain, had crept over the dim twilight, and began to
imbarrier with doubt the path of the rejoicing fugitive. He found at
last that the lines of houses receded, and that he was in an open space,
in the midst of which rose a gigantic shadow, stretching itself in
stillness and vastness on the summit of the rising ground before
him;--it was the cathedral of St. Paul's. Now, cloaked by the dark and
inclement night, he began to reflect on his actual situation: London
might swarm with his partizans, but he knew not where to find one.
Probably all those who were occupied by his fate resided in Westminster,
whence he had precipitately fled; whither assuredly he would not return.
These reflections perplexed him, but in no way allayed his transport at
finding himself free; he felt that if he wandered to the wide fields,
and died of hunger there, it were bliss enough to see the sky "unclouded
by his dungeon roof;" to behold the woods, the flowers, and the dancing
waves; nor be mocked with man's shape, when those who wore it had sold
man's dearest privilege--that of allowing his actions to wait upon the
free impulses of his heart.

Still, therefore, he hurried along, and finally became completely
bewildered in some swampy, low fields, intersected by wide ditches. The
night was pitchy dark; nor was there any clue afforded him by which he
could even guess whether he might not be returning on his path. Suddenly
a small ray of light threaded the gloom; it went and came, and at last
remained stationary. With wavering will and irregular steps the prince
proceeded towards it; for he would rather have died where he stood, than
discover himself, so to fall again into captivity. Once or twice he lost
sight of this tiny earth-star, which evidently shone through some low
casement; and, as at last he caught sight of the solitary miserable hut
where it was sphered, the recollection of his former asylum, of
ill-fated Jane Shore's penurious dwelling, flashed across him: with
speedy, reassured pace he hurried on, leaping a ditch that obstructed
his path, careless of every physical obstacle, when the malice of man
was no longer to be apprehended. "Poor Jane!" he ejaculated: and again
he reflected with some wonder that, in every adversity, women had been
his resource and support; their energies, their undying devotion and
enthusiasm, were the armour and weapons with which he had defended
himself from and attacked fortune. Even one so fallen and so low as poor
Jane Shore, was, through the might of fidelity and affection, of more
avail than all his doughty partizans, who, in the hour of need, were
scattered and forgetful.

The low-roofed cot was before him unmistaken. The crevice whence the
light emanated was too small to admit his inquiring glance; amid the
driving, pattering rain he fancied that he distinguished voices within;
but, with a boldness which bade him fear nothing, he lifted the latch,
and beheld in truth a sight of wonder;--Monina, with a shriek started
from her seat; she folded him with wild joy in her fair arms, and then,
blushing and trembling, threw herself on the neck of Lady Brampton; and
Jane herself rose from her couch of straw, more wan, more emaciated than
ever;--yet even over her sad pale face a smile wandered, showing in yet
more ghastly hues the ruin it illumined.

Questions, ejaculations, wonder and delight, burst from every lip: "He
is here to our wish; the means of escape are secured, and he is here!
Oh, dearest Lady Brampton, do not the blessed angels guard him?" Monina
spoke, and her soft luminous eyes were fixed on him, as if not daring to
believe the vision; it was not the chastened delight of age, but the
burning, ardent joy of a young heart, who had but one thought, one
desire, and that about to be accomplished; her flushed cheeks betokened
her rapture: "I have repined, despaired, almost blasphemed; yet he is
here: how good is Almighty God! Listen, dear my lord, how wondrously
opportune your arrival is: Lady Brampton will tell you all. Oh, this new
miracle is the blessed Virgin's own achievement--you are free!"

Scarcely less animated, the zealous lady detailed the circumstances that
united so favourably for him. She had been for some time at Brussels
with the Duchess Margaret, who was more grieved than could be imagined
at the capture of her beloved nephew. She lived in a state of terror on
his account. That his life was awhile spared, availed little to pacify
her; the midnight murders and prison-assassinations, so rife during the
wars of York and Lancaster were present to her imagination. She
exhausted every device, every bribe, to gain partizans for him to
achieve his freedom. Among others, most liberal of promises, was the
false Clifford. After Richard had escaped from him in the New Forest, he
fell in with Frion, whose double plot being defeated, he strove to
capture and accuse the accomplice whom, in fact, he had deceived. The
knight fled; he escaped to the Low Countries; and by a glozing tale
easily gained the ear of the duchess. Lost in England, perhaps he wished
to rebuild his fallen fortunes; aided by her munificence, perhaps he
prepared some new treachery; however it might be, he was trusted, and
was the soul of the present enterprise. De Faro's vessel, refitted and
well manned, was now anchored in the mouth of the Thames. Clifford
undertook the task of foisting some creature of his own, or even
himself, disguised, of undertaking the part of one of Richard's keepers,
when he doubted not to be able to secure his flight.

With her usual vivacity Lady Brampton gave this account; but no
explanations on her part could dissipate the horror York felt at the
name of Clifford, or inspire him with anything but distrust of his
intentions. Monina, before silenced by her sanguine associates, now gave
expression to the terror and abhorrence his interference occasioned; she
had come, exposing herself to a thousand perils and pains, merely that
she might watch over his acts, and awaken her too credulous friends to a
knowledge of his duplicity. But the danger was past; before Clifford
could know that he had escaped, York might reach the Adalid.

Almost as an answering echo to these words there was a sound of hurrying
steps. "It is he: the traitor comes. Oh, bar the door!" There was no
bar, no mode of securing this dwelling of penury; three women alone were
his guard: Monina, pale and trembling; Lady Brampton, endeavouring to
reassure her; while Richard stood forward, his gaze fixed on the opening
door, whose latch was already touched, resolved to meet, with perfect
show of frank reliance and intrepidity, the intruders.

Sir Robert Clifford entered. Confusion, attempted boldness, and, last,
sullen malice painted his aspect when he beheld the prince. He was much
changed, and looked almost an old man; his dark and profuse hair was
grizzled; his grey eyes hollow: and his dress, though that of a
cavalier, exhibited signs of habitual neglect. His person, always
slight, had been redeemed from insignificance by its exquisite grace and
elegance; every trace of this was flown; and his haggard countenance and
diminutive size made even York scarcely credit that this was indeed the
gay, reckless Robin. His resolve had been already made; he addressed him
kindly, saying, "Sir Robert, I hear that you are willing to renew to me
your broken vows: may you hereafter keep them more faithfully."

Clifford muttered a few words; he looked towards the door, as if
desirous of escape; he struggled with shame, guilt, and some other
emotion. As soon as a consultation began as to the means to be adopted
for the prince to reach the sea in safety, he conquered himself,
entering; into it with spirit and zeal. The plan he proposed was crafty,
his own part in it the principal. He spoke of disguising the prince as a
female attendant on Monina; of his and O'Water's accompanying them along
the river banks as soon as daylight.

"And wherefore not now? Or rather, wherefore even now do we not hasten
to the Thames, and seize a boat?"

"Because," said Clifford, interrupting Monina, "his highness's flight is
already known; a line of boats intersects the Thames below London
Bridge; and lower still every craft is on the alert."

Each one exchanged looks; the knight continued: "You all distrust me,
and I wonder not. I am in your power now; here are my unarmed hands;
even a woman may bind them. Go forth yourselves: seek the path to the
sea: before an hour elapses the duke will be again a prisoner. You may
in this wild spot plant your daggers in my heart to avenge, but that
will not save him; for I have no power here. But set me free, confide to
my care, and, by the God that made me, he walks the deck of the Adalid
ere the setting sun. I could tell you how this can be, and ye would not
the more trust me, if I spoke of such alliance with, such power over,
the rogues and vagabonds of this saintly city, as enables me to move
strange engines to execute my will; even if you credited me you would
disdain that your hero should owe his life to such base means. Be it as
you will: believe me; and I pledge my life that his grace will ride the
dancing waves beyond King Henry's reach to-morrow night."

"I accept the pledge," replied York, who had eyed him earnestly as he
spoke. "I commit myself to your care; act speedily, without fear of balk
or suspicion on my part."

Clifford's lips curled into a triumphant smile; because again he was
trusted, or because again he would betray, it was hard to divine. "I
must beseech your patience in the first place," said Sir Robert: "I
cannot get the fitting disguises during the night."

"Night is no more," replied Richard, throwing open the casement; and the
dusky room was illuminated by the day. In the east there was a very
fountain of light, which, welling up, flooded the flecked and broken
clouds with rosy hues: the stars were gone; a soft azure peeped between
the breaking vapours; the morning air was deliciously fresh; the birds
chirped; a distant watch-dog barked. Otherwise all was silent; and
security seemed to walk the earth.

"I will go seek the needful dresses," said Clifford. "Your Grace will
await my return, even though my stay, lengthened beyond my expectation,
give some reason for the distrust I read in every eye."

"It is but too natural," said the prince, "that my kind friends should
suspect you; for myself, I have said the word; I place myself in your
hands: half measures were of no avail. If indeed you are a traitor,
bring Tudor's hirelings here to seize their prey. I cannot fear; I will
not doubt; and, if in my soul any suspicion lurk, my actions shall not
be guided by it. Go; let your return be speedy or otherwise, I await you
here."

Scarcely had the door closed, when Monina, whose eyes had been fixed on
Clifford's countenance during the whole scene, exclaimed:--"This moment
is our own! Fly, my prince; trust me--I know that bad man; if he find
you here when he returns, you are lost."

"Hist!" Jane spoke the word, and a dead silence fell upon the anxious
band. The steps of a horse were heard: Monina flew to the casement. "It
is our faithful Irish friend, my lord; it is O'Water." The door was
opened; and each one crowded round the visitant. He uttered a "By the
mischief!" which sounded like a benediction, when he saw the duke of
York, adding, "All is well, all in readiness; I left the Adalid, after
the storm yester evening, in safe anchorage."

"Oh yes, safety," cried the enthusiastic Spaniard; "safety or
death! Trust not false Clifford--seize the fleeting, precious
opportunity,--O'Water's horse----"

"Is blown," said Richard; "he cannot carry me."

"And the ways strangely beset," said the mayor. "Just now I saw a young
gentleman seized, much to his annoyance, by some patrol. He bribed
dearly, but they would not listen--the whole country is alarmed."

"I will wait for Clifford," continued York; "and trust in Providence.
Some kind friend only bestow a dagger on me: I would not be taken like
an unarmed girl."

"A tramp of steeds--they are coming, Clifford guides them hither; we
are lost!" cried Lady Brampton.

"Oh, fly--fly--my liege," said O'Water, "expose not these women to the
assault. Poor Rose Blanche can yet bear you fast and far."

The sound as of a troop of horse neared. The prince saw O'Water blocking
up the casement, and then draw his sword. Monina, wild with agony, fell
at his feet:--"Fly, my lord, fly for the Lady Katherine's sake: fly for
mine own: must I see you die? I, who have lived--alas! how vainly. Lady
Brampton--beseech--command--he must fly. O, they will be here--to
seize, to murder him!"

"Here is my dagger, my lord," said O'Water, coolly!--"Defend
yourself--meanwhile--now at our last hour--for surely it is come, Our
Lady recommend us to God's holy grace."

The gallop of a troop grew yet more distinct; Richard looked round: Jane
was kneeling, her face buried in her hands: Lady Brampton pale, but
resolved, was ready to sacrifice the life she had spent for him. O'Water
had resigned himself to the final act of a life of peril, sealed in his
blood. The lovely Spaniard alone lost all her self-possession; tears
streaming from her uplifted eyes; her arms twined round his knees: to
fly--fly! was the only thought she could express. "I yield," said York;
"throw open the door." O'Water's horse had been led within the hut; he
vaulted on his back; he placed the dagger in his belt. "That way," Lady
Brampton cried, "it leads to the river's side below."

A scream from Monina followed his swift departure. "He perishes--he
betrays us!" cried O'Water. Richard galloped on not across the field
away from town, but right into danger; there, whence the troop was
certainly approaching. He was lost to view on the instant, in a
straggling lane which stretched out half across the field. A moment
after coming from the other side, unobserved till in the hut, Clifford
entered alone. He bore a large bundle; his steps were cautious and
swift; his look told that he was intent only on the object of his
errand. "I have succeeded beyond my hope. My life on it all is safe.
Where have ye hid the prince? Oh, prithee, fear not, nor trifle: each
second is precious."

The confused wondering looks of all present replied to him. Clifford
laughed, a short, sarcastic, bitter laugh: and then, with a fiendlike
expression of face, he said, "The prince has done well; and ye have all
done well: and his Grace will thank you anon. Ye grudge me, maybe, the
Duchess Margaret's bounty. She promised largely; 'twere pity to share
the boon among so many. Now mark the event!"

These words displayed the baseness of his motive, yet vouched for his
sincerity. He threw a menacing glance around, and then quitted the hut;
and with hurried pace hastened across the field towards the town.




CHAPTER LII

TREASON


     Full many a glorious morning: have I seen,
     Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
     Kissing with golden face the meadows green;
     Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
     Anon, permit the basest clouds to ride
     With ugly rack on his celestial face.

                                             SHAKSPEARE.


The duke of York, urged so earnestly to fly, felt that to do so was to
save himself at the expense of his friends, on whom Henry's vengeance
would severely fall, when he found himself balked of his victim. He
consented to leave Jane Shore's abode, with the resolve not of effecting
his escape, but of securing, by surrendering himself, the safety of his
defenceless adherents united under her lowly roof. He directed his
course as he believed into the very centre of danger, entering the
narrow straggling street whence the sound of the advance of the troop of
horse had been heard. He entered the lane; it was empty. The ominous
sounds were still sharp and near; it seemed as if they were in some
street parallel to the one which he threaded. He turned at right angles
into another, to reach the spot: again he turned, led by the baffling
noise, in another direction. It was just four in the morning; there were
but few abroad so early: he saw a monk gliding stealthily from under a
dark archway, and a poor fellow, who looked as if he had slept beneath
heaven's roof, and had not wherewithal to break his fast. True to the
kindly instincts of his nature, Richard felt at his girdle for his
purse; it was long since he had possessed the smallest coin of his
adversary's realm. "I, a prince!" his feeling had been more bitter, but
that his fingers came in contact with his dagger's hilt, and the
conviction of freedom burst with fresh delight upon him. Free, even in
spite of its intents; for the tramp which had gradually grown fainter,
was dying absolutely away.

They had probably reached the hut: thither he must return. It was no
easy thing to find his way to it, he had so entangled himself in the
narrow lanes, and wretched assemblages of dwellings huddled together on
the outskirts of London. At length they opened before him: there was the
dingy field, there the hut, standing in quiet beneath the rays of the
morning sun, of the opening, summer, soft, sweet day. He was quickly at
its threshold; he entered. Jane was within, alone, seated in her wooden
chair; her hands clasped; her pale face sunk on her bosom: big tears
were gathering in her eyes, and rolling down her faded cheeks unheeded.
Jane's aspect was usually so marble (a miraculous chiselling of resigned
hopelessness), her mien so unbending, that these signs of emotion struck
the prince with wonder and compassion.

He knelt at her feet and pressed her thin, but little hand to his lips,
saying, "Mother, where are my friends? Mother, bless me before I go."

She dried the drops raining from her eyes, saying in a voice that
expressed how occupied she was by her own emotion, "I am a sinful woman;
well do these tones remind me of the same: those days are quite, quite
gone, even from the memory of all; but once they were as the present
hour, when so he spoke, and I was lost, and still am lost; for, through
hunger and cold and shame, I love, and cannot quite repent. Will the
hour ever come when I can regret that once I was happy?"

Many, many sad years had passed since words like these had dropped from
poor Jane's lips; her feelings fed on her, possessed her, but she had
been mute; overflowing now, her accent was calm; she spoke as if she was
unaware that her thoughts framed speech, and that she had an auditor.

"You have paid a dear penalty, and are surely forgiven," said York,
striving in his compassion to find the words that might be balm to her.

"Prince," she continued, "some time ago,--I have lost all date; now the
chasm seems nought, now a long eternity; it was when my poor heart knew
nothing of love, save its strong necessity and its delight; methought I
would see your father's fair offspring, for I loved them for his sake.
At the festival of Easter I placed myself near the gate of the royal
chapel: I thought to be unseen. The happy queen held her sons each by
the hand; you were then, as now, his image, a little sportive blue-eyed
cherub. The prince of Wales had his mother's look: her large, dark eye,
her soft, rosy mouth, her queenlike brow; her beauty which had won
Edward, her chaste sweetness, which had made her his wife; my
presence--I thought to conceal it better--was revealed. The queen
turned her face away; there was anguish surely written there, for the
prince darted on me a look of such withering scorn--yes, even he--his
stainless, fair brow was knit, his bright angel's face clouded: the look
sank in my heart. Edward's beautiful, pure child reproved me, hated me:
for three days I felt that I would never see the deluder more: you do
not share his abhorrence; you do not hate the pale ghost of Shore's
wife?"

Such clinging to the past, such living memory of what was so absolutely
dead to all except herself, awe-struck the prince: "We are all sinners
in the eye of God," he said, "but thy faults are surely forgiven thee,
gentle one: thy tears have washed every trace away, and my brother, my
poor murdered Edward, now blesses thee. Alas! would that I could soften
this last stage of your suffering earthly life."

"'Tis better as it is," she answered hastily, "once I felt disgrace and
privation keenly; perhaps that may atone. Now, would it were more
bitter, that so I might wean myself from him whose very memory will lose
my soul. You are good, and Our Lady will requite you. Now, listen: the
damsel Monina and Master O'Water have gone towards Southend: your
remaining friends watch for you here. I shall see them again to-night:
meanwhile it is to be feared that Clifford plots vengeance, and you must
fly; you must at every hazard go towards Southend. Beyond the town, on
the lone sands, there is a wooden cross, telling where one escaped
dreadful peril through the might of Him who died on it for us; the
smallest sign, the waving of your cap, will be watched for by the
Adalid, they will send a boat to take you on board. Now swiftly depart:
your life hangs on the hour; this purse will furnish you with means Lady
Brampton left it for you."

"Bless me, mother, ere I go."

"Can a sinner's blessing avail? fear rather that God punish me through
you, where my heart is garnered. Oh, may He indeed bless and save you;
and I shall die in peace."

He kissed her withered hand and was gone; she dragged her failing limbs
to the casement; he was already lost among the straggling tenements that
bounded her field.

Again York was flying from his foe; again studying to elude pursuit,
with how different feelings. Before, his flight was peremptory, for the
preservation of others, while he blindly longed to deliver himself to
slavery. Now liberty, for its own dear sake, was worth the world to him.
He had tasted to its dregs the misery of captivity, and loathed the very
name; whatever might betide, he would never submit willingly again to
one hour's thraldom. He felt his dagger's hilt; he drew it from the
sheath, and eyed its polished blade with gladness; for eight months he
had been living unarmed, under the perpetual keeping of armed jailors;
what wonder that he looked on this sharp steel as the key to set him
free from every ill.

He got clear of the town: the open sky, the expanse of summer--adorned
earth was before him. It was the "leafy month of June;" the far-spread
corn-fields were getting yellow; and on their weltering surface played
the shadows of a few clouds, relics of the last night's storm: the sun
was bright, the breeze balmy, already the very foot-paths were dry, and
scarcely from its inmost leaves did any tree shake moisture: yet there
was a freshness in the scene, a lightness in the air, the gift of
tempest. The dazzling sun rose higher, and each island-vapour sank on
the horizon; the garish light clothed all things; the lazy shadows crept
up around the objects which occasioned them, while both object and its
shade seemed to bask in the sunshine. Now overhead the meeting boughs of
trees scarce sufficed to shield him from the penetrating glare; now in
the open path he was wholly exposed to it, as his diminished shadow
clung almost to the horse's hoofs. The birds twittered above; the lazy
mare was stretched basking, while her colt gambolled around; each slight
thing spoke of the voluptuous indolence of summer, and the wafted scent
of hay, or gummy exhalation of evergreens, distilled by the warm noon,
fed with languid sweets every delighted sense. If paradise be ever of
this world it now embowered Richard. All was yet insecure; his White
Rose was far: but nature showered such ecstasy on him that his whole
being was given up to her influence. Latterly the form of man had been
ever before his aching sight under the aspect of an enemy; the absence
of every fellow-creature he hailed with gladness--free and alone, alone
and free! With the pertinacious dwelling on one idea, which is
characteristic of overpowering feeling, this combination of words and
ideas haunted his thoughts, fell from his lips, and made a part of the
soul-subduing rapture now his portion.

May it be added--we must address the unhappy and imaginative, who _know_
that the future is so linked with the present as to have an influence
over that present, when we add--that the intensity of the liberated
prince's feelings was wrought even to pain, by its being the last time
that unalloyed delight would ever be his--the last when he might feel
himself the nursling of nature, allied by the bond of enjoyment to all
her offspring. He knew not this himself. Immersed in the sense of all
that he now possessed, he did not pause to reflect whether this were the
last time, that he, the victim of chance and change, might ever see the
waving corn or shadowy trees, or hear the carolling birds, or the
murmurs of the fresh free brooks gurgling round some pendant bough or
jutting stone; but that so it was to be, gave poignancy to his pleasure,
a dreamy halo to the whole scene.

It would appear, in spite of the precautions taken by his enemy, that
the north bank of the Thames had been neglected. Richard met with no
impediment in his progress. Whenever he caught a sight of the river, he
perceived unusual signs of activity. Little wherries shot hither and
thither on its surface, revealing to him that keen and vigilant search
was being made. Meanwhile he rode on, the broad stream for his guide,
avoiding towns and villages. He ventured to purchase bread at a lone
farm-house--he alighted in a little grove beside a rivulet, to rest his
tired horse, and to refresh himself. The summer heat recalled Andalusia
to his mind; and scenes and objects, quite forgotten, wandered from
their oblivious recesses back into his recollection. "My happy boyhood!
My beloved Spain! Why did I leave the land of beauty, where with
Monina----?" The idea of her whose fate was so inextricably linked
with his, of his bride, who had quitted her palace home to share his
adversity, reproached him. But his imagination could not fix itself on
bleak Scotland, its wild haunts, its capricious king: it could only
build another bower among the folds of the mountains of Andalusia, and
place his White Rose therein.

Again he pursued his way. The slant beams of the descending sun were yet
more sultry, but it sank swiftly down; now casting gigantic shadows,
bathing the tree-tops in golden dew, and flooding the clouds with
splendour; now it was gone, and the landscape faded into a brown mellow
tint. The birds' last chirp was given, the beetle winged her noisy
flight, the congregated rooks had flown to the belfry of the church, or
to their nests in the churchyard trees; silence and twilight crept up
from the sedgy banks of the river, leaving the pale water alone to
reflect the struggling farewell of day. In a little time the banks
shelved away, giving place to broad yellow sand. Richard ventured to
bend his course along the beach. There was a bark upon the dim tide,
whose progress he had watched since noon, whose flapping or full sails
were the signs by which he foretold the prosperity of his destined
voyage. Now with swelling canvas it walked swiftly over the water.

He passed Southend. He perceived the tall rough-hewn cross. Two figures
were seated at its foot. He hesitated, but quickly perceiving that one
was a woman, he proceeded onwards. The stars were out; the very west was
dim; in the offing there was a vessel, whose build and tall slender
masts he thought he recognized. The broad expanse of calm ocean was
there, whose waves broke in tiny ripplets on the beach. He reached the
cross. O'Water and Monina saw his approach. The Irishman welcomed him
boisterously, in his own language. Monina uttered a benediction in
Spanish. The scene was solitary and secure. Every danger was past. There
floated the caravel which insured escape, and the stars alone witnessed
their flight. Monina gave her white veil to O'Water, who contrived to
elevate it on the cross. In a few moments the splash of oars was heard,
and a dark speck floated towards them on the waves, from the direction
of the Adalid. "They come; you are safe," murmured his lovely friend;
"this hour repays for all." The boat was already on the beach: a seaman
leaped on shore. "The White English Rose," he said: such was the word
agreed upon; and, hailing it, Monina hurried to embark with her
companions. The little boat was pushed from shore. O'Water gave vent to
his delight in a shout that resembled a yell. Monina crept close to the
duke of York: that he was safe was a truth so dear, so new, that she
forgot everything, save her wish to assure herself again and again that
so it was. At that moment of triumph, something like sadness invaded
Richard: he had quitted the land for which his friends had bled, and he
had suffered--for ever: he had left his Katherine there, where all was
arrayed against him for his destruction. This was safety; but it was the
overthrow of every childish dream, every youthful vision; it put the
seal of ineffectual nothingness on his every manhood's act.

While each, occupied by their peculiar reveries, were aware only that
they were being borne onwards on the waves, a smaller boat shot athwart
their bows, and a voice exclaimed in Spanish, "Desdichados, estais
allá?"

"My father--we are betrayed," Monina cried: and she threw her arms
round Richard, as if by such frail guard to shelter him--another
stronger grasp was upon his arm as he endeavoured to rise--a voice,
husky from passion, yet still Clifford's voice, muttered, "The day is
mine--you--she--all are mine!"

"Thou fell traitor! What ho! De Faro, to the rescue!" already the
mariner had thrown a grappling iron--already the Adalid was in motion
towards them. Clifford strove to draw his sword. York was upon him in
mortal struggle; his keen dagger, unsheathed, uplifted; the boat
lurched--his arm descended, but half the force of the intended blow was
lost, while both fell overboard. The crew rushed to the boat's side to
loosen the grappling iron, which concluded its upset. De Faro, who stood
high on the bows of his own boat, had seized Monina. Now another larger
skiff was seen approaching, "To your oars!" cried the Moor: they shot
swiftly towards the Adalid, and while the sea became alive with craft,
they reached the little caravel, who, turning her canvas to the wind,
dropped down the tide.




CHAPTER LIII

DEATH OF CLIFFORD


     Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
     Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
     For what care I who calls me well or ill,
     So you o'erskreen my bad--my good allow?

                                          SHAKSPEARE.


On the fourth day of her restraint, imprisonment it could hardly be
called. Lady Katherine was brought up to Westminster; she was carried in
a close litter, and no familiar face or accustomed attendant came near.
Her anxiety, her anguish weighed intolerably upon her--sleep had not
visited her eyes; she lived in perpetual terror that each sound was
freighted with fatal tidings. It was in vain that even reason bade her
nourish hope--a stronger power than reason dwelt in her heart, turning
all its yearnings to despair.

As she approached the city, she thought each step must reveal the truth
of what she was to suffer. Lo! the palace was entered--her habitual
chamber--silence and solitude alone manifested that some change was
even now in its effect; she had no tear? to spend upon her grief; her
changing colour, her quickened respiration showed that every faculty was
possessed by terror. Two hours, each minute stretched to a long, long
century,--two hours passed, when a little scroll was delivered to her;
it came from the queen, and contained these words, "My White Rose! the
tempest has past--leaving, alas! devastation: we yet remain to each
other--come----"

These expressions spoke the worst to her fear-stricken mind--no
subsequent agony might ever compare to the pang that made her very
life-blood pause in her failing heart at that moment. Had the present
and the future become void for him, to whom she was wedded heart and
soul?--wedded in youth, when our hopes stretch themselves not merely to
to-day and to-morrow, but even to eternity. In this state of human woe,
we do not describe the disheartening and carking sorrows of those who
lag on life's highway--but the swift, poignant, intolerable agonies of
the young, to whom the aspiration for happiness is a condition of being.
The queen had been accustomed to witness and admire Katherine's
self-command and quiet fortitude; she was awe-struck on beholding the
devastation of the last four days, and the expression of wild horror on
her soft features. With feminine instinct she read her heart, her first
words were, "Sweet love, he lives--and he will live--his life is
spared, and we may still hope."

Tears at last flowed from the mourner's eyes, as she asked, "What then
will be his fate?--Shall I ever see him more?"

"How can we guess the hidden purposes of the king? By your enforced
solitude you have escaped his scowling brow, his violence, his sarcasms;
again he smiles. My gentle Kate, my sweet, courageous sufferer, hitherto
we have played with the lion's fangs--they are unsheathed in anger
now--let us prepare: he will be here anon."

The princess desired not to exhibit too humiliating a spectacle of
misery to her cruel foe--she checked her weeping--she endeavoured to
forget the burning agony that tortured her beating heart. "Let him but
live; let me but once more see him;" and the unbidden tears flowed
again. The king soon broke in upon them; his look was haughty even to
insolence: an expression of vulgar triumph was in his eyes, that baffled
the eager scanning gaze of the hapless princess. He said, scoffingly
(and was it in man's nature, or only in Henry's, to look on the sad, but
lovely countenance of his victim, and to mock her woe?), "We
congratulate you, lady, on the return of the gentle Perkin to our good
city of Westminster--do not weep--he is in safe keeping now, very
safe--it is no feathered shoe our Mercury wears this day."

"Holy Virgin!" cried Katherine, "your grace does not surely mean----"

"Fear not--he lives," continued Henry, his scorn growing more bitter as
he spoke; "he lives, and shall live, till the White Rose acknowledge on
what base stock she is grafted, or he twist the rope by some new
sleight. Is Perkin's honoured dame satisfied?"

"Oh, no, no, no; some covert meaning you have; in pity for a woman,
speak." The agony her countenance expressed was the mute echo of the
frightful idea that convulsed her frame. "Oh, let me see him! you have
tormented me too cruelly; even if my worst fears prove true, he suffers
not more than I; and can it be that the young limbs of my own loved
Richard are put to torture!"

Elizabeth, grew ashy white; the king listened with a sarcastic smile,
saying, "I had not thought of that; you are a silly girl to mention such
things."

"I do not believe you," exclaimed the princess, "your looks belie your
words; let me but see him afar off, let me catch a glimpse of my
princely love--is he in the Tower?"

"Neither the Tower, nor any royal palace, detains your lord; he is
taking the air, pleasantly I hope, in the high places of our town. To
finish this war of words, and your incredulity, will you visit your
prince of plotters, and behold him on whom the king of Scotland bestowed
your virgin hand?"

"See him! Oh, even in death to clasp his decaying limbs were better than
this absence!"

An indefinable expression passed over Henry's countenance as he replied,
"Be it as you wish; you must hasten, for in an hour the occasion will be
past; it is but a few steps; you shall be attended."

At last she was to see him; this assurance filled and satisfied her;
there was no place in her heart for any other thought, sinister as were
her torturer's looks. Her eyes grew bright, her cheek resumed its
vermeil tint, never had she looked more lovely; it was a dazzling
beauty; one of those ineffable expressions, which, unless language could
express music, or painting image fire, it is in vain to attempt to
describe: an irradiation of love passed over her countenance; her form;
something like it dwells in Raphael's Madonnas and Guido's Angel of
Annunciation,--Henry was awe-struck, yet did not falter in his purpose;
he let the bright angel go forth on her mission of good and love, to
meet on her way a sight fiends might rejoice over. Human life and human
nature are, alas! a dread, inexplicable web of suffering and of
infliction.

In Westminster, in sight of the abbey where his ancestors had been
crowned kings, the spectacle, intended to be so opprobrious, was set
forth. Henry, in his angry fear on his escape, in his exultation at his
re-capture, forgot the soft tyranny of Katherine's looks; or rather he
despised himself for the obedience he had yielded to them; and, in the
true spirit of baseness, was glad to revenge on her the ill effects that
had resulted to him through his involuntary enslavement. It was a
triumph to him to disgrace the object of her care, for he was ill-read,
his understanding affording him no key to the unknown language, in that
illuminated page of the history of feminine excellence, which tells the
delight she feels in exhausting her treasures of devoted love on the
fallen, because they need it most: he believed, that to present her
husband to her, under the very infliction of ignominy, would turn her
affection to cold disdain--he permitted her to go. Attended by some of
the body-guard and a gentleman usher, she hastened through the courts of
the palace into the open square: there was assembled a crowd of common
people, hushed to universal silence: at a distance from the centre some
were talking aloud, and the name of "Perkin" was the burthen of their
speech; but pity stilled those nearest to the spot, towards which, to
the surprise and horror of all, she hastened. The crowd instinctively
closed to bar her advance; and, when forced to make way, in spite of the
despotism of the times, the word "Shame" burst from the lips of many,
especially the women. She was agitated by the obstacles, by the numerous
uncourtly eyes turned on her; still she went on, and soon saw--

She understood not what--a kind of wooden machine, in which the lord of
her heart sat. There had been a time when pride and royal majesty of
soul had shed such grandeur over York, that, when exposed as a show, he
had excited reverence, not scoffing. Now he was evidently labouring
under great physical suffering; his brow was streaked with mortal
paleness, his cheeks were colourless; his fair hair fell in disordered
ringlets round his youthful but wan countenance; he leaned his head
against the side of the machine: his eyes were half shut; it was not
shame, but suffering, that weighed upon their lids, and diffused an air
of languor and pain over his whole person. Katherine hastened towards
him, she knelt on the unworthy earth at his side, she kissed his chained
hands. "You are ill, my love; my ever dear Richard, what has happened?
for you are very ill."

Roused by such music from the lethargy that oppressed him, yet still
overcome, he replied, "Yes; and I do believe that all will soon end, and
that I am stricken to the death."

She grew pale; she called him cruel; asking him how he could dream of
leaving her, who was a part of him, alone in the desolate world.
"Because," he answered with a faint smile, "the world is kind to all,
save me. No taint, dear love, attaches itself to your name; no ill will
mark your fate, when you are no longer linked to such a thing as I. God
has spoken, and told me that this earth is no dwelling for one, who,
from his cradle to this last shame, has been fortune's step-child, and
her despised toy. How often have I been dragged to the utmost verge of
life: I have felt indignation, anger, despair; now I am resigned; I feel
the hand of the Mighty One on me, and I bow to it. In very truth, I am
subdued; I sleep away the weary hours, and death will end them all."

With every expression of tenderness, Katherine endeavoured to recall him
to life and to herself. She spoke of another escape, which it would be
her care to achieve, of the solitude, of the paradise of love they would
enjoy together. "My poor girl," he replied, "teach your young heart to
seek these blessings apart from me; I were the very wretch Tudor
stigmatises me, could I live under a memory like this. Forget me, my
White Rose; paint with gaudier colours the sickly emblem of my fortunes;
forget that, duped by some strange forgery, you were wedded to--Perkin
Warbeck."

In spite of himself, large drops gathered in his eyes, swelling the
downcast lids, and then stealing down. Catherine kissed them from his
cheek; a thousand times more noble, royal, godlike, she called him; had
not the best and worthiest suffered ignominious punishment; even our
blessed Lord himself? His own acknowledgment alone could disgrace him;
he must recall the false words wrung from his agony; this last vile act
of his enemy must awaken each sovereign on his throne to indignation;
each would see in him a mirror of what might befall themselves, if
fallen. James, her royal cousin, roused by her, should resent the stigma
affixed to his kinsman.

"For your own sake, sweet, do so; my soul dying within me is alive again
with indignation, to think that your plighted wedded love is he, who is
exposed to contumely; but for that, methinks I would call myself by that
wretched name I dared pronounce, so that the annals of the House of York
escaped this stain: yet even thus I seem more closely allied to them;
for violent death, treachery, and ill have waited on each descendant of
Mortimer; my grandfather bore a paper crown in shame upon his kingly
brow."

He was interrupted by the officer, who unclosed the instrument of
disgrace. Richard, weak and failing, was assisted to rise; Katherine
supported him as a young mother her feeble offspring; she twined her
arms round him as his prop, and, in spite of misery, was enraptured once
again to see, to hear, to touch him from whom she had been absent so
long. "This is not well; it must not be; his majesty will be much
displeased," said the chief of the guard, witnessing the compassion her
tender care inspired. "You must return to the palace, lady."

"One little step," pleaded Katherine; "if I should never see him more,
how should I curse your cruelty! I will not speak, as I half thought I
would to these good people, to tell them that they may well honour him a
princess loves: drag me not away yet--one more good-bye!--farewell,
noble York, Kate's only love;--we meet again; this parting is but
mockery."

She wept on his bosom; the sound of wailing arose in the crowd; the
prince's eyes alone were dry; he whispered comfort to her; he promised
to live, to baffle his foe again for her sake; the words revived her,
and she saw him depart with hope, with new joy kindled in her bosom.

There had been another, the public gaze, till Katherine came to draw all
eyes to a newer wonder. An emaciated, pale woman, in a garb of penury,
who knelt, telling her beads, beside York's prison; her face was hid;
but her hands were thin and white to ghastliness; during the last scene
she had sobbed to agony, and now, as the place cleared, went her way
silently, with slow, feeble steps. Many marked her with surprise and
curiosity; few knew that she was the Jane Shore, whose broken heart
whispered misery, as she thought that she beheld King Edward's guilt, in
which she had shared, visited on his son. This cruel lesson of religion
was a canker in her heart, and most true it was, as far as regarded her
royal lover, that his light loves, and careless playing with sacred
ties, had caused the blot of base birth to be affixed to his legitimate
offspring, and so strewed the sad way that led them to untimely death.

Henry, cruel as he was, had not the courage to encounter his insulted
prisoner on her return. Katherine's feelings were wrought too high for
any display of passion; her anxiety was spent on how she could sooth
York's wounded feelings, and restore his health: it were vain to ask,
she feared; yet, if the king would permit her to attend on him, under
whatever restrictions, they should be obeyed; and this while poor
Elizabeth besought her pardon with tears, for being the wife of her
insolent adversary. She, a proud Plantagenet, was more sorely stung than
the White Rose, by the indignity offered to her house; and she entreated
her not to love her brother less because of this foul disgrace. "So
doing," said the quick-sighted queen, "you fulfil his dearest wish.
While you are Richard's loving wife, he, even he, the fallen and
humiliated, is an object of envy to his majesty, who sought, by making
you witness his ignominy, to detach you from him."

"How strange a mistake," replied Katherine, "for one so sage as the
king: the lower my sweet Richard falls, the more need he surely has of
me. But that love, such as ours, knits us too indivisibly to admit a
reciprocity of benefit, I should say that it is to make me rich indeed,
to enable me to bestow, to lavish good on my lord; but we are one, and I
but give to myself, and myself receive, if my weakness is of any
strength to him. Dear sister mine, your liege, wise as he may be, is a
tyro in our woman's lore--in the mysteries of devoted love; he never
felt one inspiration of the mighty sprite."

This was not quite true. For some few days Henry had been so inspired;
but love, an exotic in his heart, degenerated from being a fair,
fragrant flower, into a wild, poisonous weed. Love, whose essence is the
excess of sympathy, and consequently of self-abandonment and generosity,
when it alights on an unworthy soil, appears there at first in all its
native bloom, a very wonder even to the heart in which it has taken
root. The cold, selfish, narrow-hearted Richmond was lulled to some
slight forgetfulness of self, when first he was fascinated by Katherine,
and he decked himself with ill-assorted virtues to merit her
approbation. This lasted but a brief interval; the uncongenial clime in
which the new plant grew, impregnated it with its own poison. Envy,
arrogance, base desire to crush the fallen, were his natural
propensities; and, when love refused to minister to these, it changed to
something like hate in his bosom; it excited his desire to have power
over her, if not for her good, then for her bane.

The duke of York was imprisoned in the Tower. No further measures were
apparently in action against him. Katherine no longer hoped anything
from her foe; and day and night there lay beneath her eyelids the image
of Richard, wasting and dying in captivity. Something must be done, some
aid afforded him; she was anxious also to learn the details of his
flight, and how again he fell into the hands of his foe. Monina, who in
a thousand disguises had been used to penetrate everywhere, was seen no
more. Still public report informed her of many things.

It was known, that Sir Robert Clifford, the old spy and traitor of the
White Rose, had become aware of the measures taken by York's adherents
to insure his escape from England. He had followed him down the river,
and by a knowledge of the signs and countersigns of the party, decoyed
him into a boat that was to convey his victim back to his prison-house.
The deceit was discovered, and a mortal struggle ensued on board the
tiny bark; it sunk, and many perished, Clifford among the rest. On the
morrow his body was found upon the beach, stiff and stark; a gaping
wound in his neck showed that the waters alone had not been his foe; in
his clenched hand he grasped a mass of golden hairs, severed by some
sharp implement from the head to which they grew: as if nought else
could liberate his enemy from his hold. There he lay, bold Robin
Clifford, the dauntless, wily boy, hunted through life by his own fell
passions, envy, cupidity, and libertinism; they had tracked him to this
death; his falsehoods were now mute, his deceptions passed away; he
could never more win by his smiles, or stab by his lying words; death
alone had a share in him, death and the cold sands beneath which he was
interred, leaving a name, the mark of scorn, the symbol of treachery.

They had struggled beneath the strangling waves, Richard and his
adversary. The prince was wounded in the scuffle, and became enfeebled
almost to insensibility before he could sever from his enemy's grasp the
fair locks he clutched--he swam away, as well as he might, and, with
the instinct of self-preservation, made for the shore--he forgot that
England was a wide prison--he only strove to master the fate which beat
him to the ground. He reached the sands--he sought the covert of some
near underwood, and threw himself upon the earth in blind thankfulness;
exhausted, almost inanimate, he lay there, given up only to the sense of
repose, and safety from death, which visited his failing heart with a
strange sense of pleasure.

The following morning was far advanced, before he could rouse himself
from this lethargy. He looked upon the waters; but the Adalid was no
more to be seen--he was quite alone; he needed succour, and none was
afforded him. Well he knew that every field, lane, dingle, and copse
swarmed with enemies, and he shuddered at the likelihood that unarmed,
and weak as he was, he should fall into their hands. He desired to reach
London again as his sole refuge; and he journeyed, as he hoped, towards
it, all unknowing of the route. No way-worn traveller in savage lands,
pursued by barbarous enemies, ever suffered more than the offspring of
Edward the Fourth amidst the alienated fields of his paternal kingdom.
Cold and rain succeeded to the pleasant summer weather:--during night
he lay exposed to the tempests--during day he toiled on, his limbs
benumbed, his heart wasted by hunger and fatigue; yet never, at the head
of the Scottish chivalry, never in Burgundy or in England, did he feel
more resolute not to submit, but, baffling fortune and his enemy's
power, to save himself in spite of fate. He had wandered far inland, and
knew not where he was--he had indeed passed beyond London, and got up
as high as Barnes. It was the fourth day from that of his escape--he
had tasted little food, and no strength remained in him, except that
which gave energy to his purpose. He found himself on a wide, heathy
common, studded with trees, or desolately open--the rainy day closed,
and a bleak east wind swept over the plain, and curled the
leaden-coloured waters of the river--his love of life, his
determination not to yield, quailed before the physical miseries of his
lot; for some few moments, he thought that he would lie down and die.

At this time another human figure appeared upon the scene. A Benedictine
lay-brother, who, in the freedom of solitude, in defiance of wind and
rain, trolled a ditty, fitter for a ruffling swaggerer's bonnet, than a
monk's cowl. He started not a little, on perceiving our wanderer leaning
against the scathed trunk of a solitary tree; nor less did he wonder
when he recognized the fallen prince. It was Heron himself, the
magnanimous mercer, who having effected his escape with a well-hoarded
purse, contrived to introduce himself into the house of Bethlem, at
Shene, which was called the Priory. He was a little frightened to
perceive his ancient leader; but pity succeeded to fear; and with many
fair words and persuasions he induced him to permit himself to be
conducted to the Priory. There, since he believed himself to be dying,
he might receive the last sacraments--there perhaps, for, some few
minutes, he might again behold his Katherine.

Thus was the fugitive again led within the pale of his enemy's power.
The prior, a man esteemed for holiness, did not delay to make his
sovereign acquainted with the capture of his rival. His awe of Katherine
having vanished, Henry was left at liberty to follow the ungenerous
dictates of his grovelling spirit. Many a courtier, true man or false,
counselled the death of the aspiring youth; and they praised their
master's magnanimity, when he rejected this advice, and in lieu exposed
him, whom he knew to be the descendant of a line of kings, to beggarly
disgrace. Thus worn and weak, the ill-fated son of York was made a
public spectacle of infamy. But Henry went a step too far; and, when he
thrust the Scottish princess forward on the scene, he turned defeat to
triumph.

He was not to die--but rather to pine out a miserable existence--or
had the sage monarch any other scheme? The high-spirited prince was to
be cooped up within the Tower--there, where the earl of Warwick wasted
his wretched life. Did he imagine that the resolved and ardent soul of
Richard would, on its revival, communicate a part of its energy to the
son of Clarence, and that ere long they would be enveloped in one ruin?
Some words had transpired that appeared to reveal such an intention; and
his order to the lieutenant of the Tower, that, without permitting, he
should connive at any covert intercourse between the two--his
recommendation of a noted spy and hireling to a high trust, and the
order this fellow had to bring each day intelligence to the palace from
the prison--spoke loudly of some design; for Henry never did aught in
vain. It was in circulation also among the lower officers in the
fortress, that an attempt to escape was expected on the part of the
prisoners, and that rich reward would attend its discovery.




CHAPTER LIV

IMPRISONMENT IN THE TOWER


     And bare, at once, Captivity displayed,
     Stands scoffing through the never-opened gate;
     Which nothing through its bars admits, save day
     And tasteless food.

                                                  BYRON.


The Lady Katherine, no longer trusting the good intentions of the
insolent tyrant, was eager to communicate with her royal cousin of
Scotland, to urge him to save from death or disgrace, if not to effect
the liberation of him to whom he had given her hand. The difficulty of
finding a messenger was great. The queen, all amiable and sorrowing as
she was, shrunk from any act, which, if discovered, would enrage the
king. Where did Monina tarry while her friend was in this strait? Of all
his sometime associates was there not one who would risk all to retard
the last steps of fate. Since York's escape she had been so vigilantly
guarded, that a thousand schemes she had formed for her own evasion
proved abortive at their very outset.

Help was at length afforded her unexpectedly, when most despairing.
Edmund Plantagenet stood before her--changed indeed from what he had
been; she had not seen him since the siege of Exeter, where he was
wounded; but slight was his bodily hurt in comparison to the death-blow
his mind received.

Plantagenet was one of those concentrated characters, whose very outward
show of softness and gentleness serves the more to force the texture of
their souls to receive one indelible impression. He had passed a boyhood
of visions, given up to mighty aspirations and engrossing reverie. His
thoughts were stirring as the acts of others; his forest-school had so
tutored him, that he could live in bodily repose, while his mind
ruminated: he could be quickened to hope and fear, to lofty ambition, to
generosity, and devoted courage, feeling in his heart the keenest
impulses--while around him were the mute trees of the wild wood and
pathless glades. He could be satisfied with such dreamy illusions; so
that action with him was never the result of physical restlessness, nor
of youthful emulation, nor of that stirring spirit of life which forces
us to abhor repose. It flowed from an imperious sense of duty; it welled
up from the very sources of his soul. Other men perform the various
parts allotted to them, and yet are something else the while; as is the
actor, even while he struts in the garb of royalty: but Edmund yielded
himself wholly up, and was the mere creature of the thought within.

To be great and good--great from the good he should effect, was his
boyhood's aspiration. It is probable that, if he had not been subjected
to extraneous influence, he would have devoted himself to religion, and
become a saint or martyr; for his all, his understanding, heart, and
person, would have been given up to the holy cause he espoused. His
being led to King Richard's tent, the night before the battle of
Bosworth Field, gave a new and inextinguishable law to his life. Unknown
duties were imposed. The first and dearest was, to redeem his father's
soul from the guilt of murderous ambition, by elevating his injured
nephew to his original greatness. He devoted himself to his cousin. Soon
he learned to love Richard as the work of his own hands. He had reared
his tender infancy; he had been his tutor in martial exercises, teaching
him to curb the fiery steed, to wield the lance, and, more than all, to
meet danger in the field fearlessly: to be honourable, brave, and kind.
He had led him to war, and shielded him with his own body from the cruel
Moor. If ever they were divided, his thoughts dwelt only the more
carefully with him. Last, he had brought him from glorious combats in
Spain, to conquer his ancestral kingdom, and set him up the rival of a
powerful king--the mark of his vengeance.

It was all over. Edmund possessed no innate strength to rise from the
blow; he was a mariner on the wide ocean, without compass or rudder. The
universe had one central point for him; that was destroyed, and a total
blank remained. York's first surrender visited him as a death-stroke; he
struggled against it. Enfeebled by his wound, more by despair, he passed
over to Ireland; there he expected to find friends of the White Rose; he
found only enemies of Duke Perkin: men eager to exculpate themselves
from the charges of ill faith or ingratitude, gladly adopted a
phraseology, or a belief, that reduced to dust the golden glories of
poor Edmund's idol. Perkin Warbeck! Oh thou flower of York! thou
nursling of love, though child of calamity, is even thy bright name so
to be tainted? Not by those immediately arrayed by self-interest against
thee; but by, the vulgar crew, ever eager to crush the fallen. There was
no hope in Ireland. Keating, the Prior of Kilmainham, was dead. The earl
of Desmond was reconciled to the English government. Lord Barry had fled
to Spain. The citizens of Cork were busy redeeming, by eager servility,
their mayor's disloyalty.

Overcome by these sad changes, a malignant fever seized on Edmund: in
addition to every other disappointment, he had the consciousness that
his aid was necessary to his cousin: that his absence was probably
misinterpreted by his friends as cowardly dereliction. York was calling
on him in vain. Monina perhaps suspected his truth. Next to the sun of
his life, the noble Richard, Monina lay nearest his heart. It was a
mixture of many feelings; and even love, subdued by hopelessness,
quickened them to greater intensity. As soon as he could rise from his
couch, he directed his course to England. He arrived in London on the
day of the duke of York's worst disgrace. It was reported to him as the
gossip of the town: at the fatal word a mortal change seized upon his
frame: his limbs were as if struck by palsy; his cheeks fell in; his
hair grew white. On his arrival he had taken up his abode in a monastery
in the habit of a poor pilgrim: the sage monks, who beheld his state,
possessed no leech-craft to administer his cure: he lay with beating
pulses and open eyes, while the work of the grave appeared already in
operation against him: he wasted into a fleshless skeleton. And then
another secret change came over him; he conquered death, and crawled
forth, the ghost of what he was, into the hopeless world.

He contrived to gain admission to the princess. She did not recognize
him, such was the pale disguise disease had put upon him. His voice,
hollow as from a tomb, was altered; his dark, melancholy eyes, occupying
too large a portion of his face, gleamed from under his streaked and wan
brow. Yet his was a visit of comfort, for he could do her mission to
Scotland, and invite the forgetful James to succour his friend and
kinsman. Edmund listened eagerly to this proposal: a draught of soothing
balm descended into his frame, with the thought that yet all was not
lost. His physical energy almost returned: he hurried to depart--"How
will you traverse this wide kingdom?" asked the lady. "Cannot the Adalid
come as before, to aid and speed you on your way?"

"The Adalid is sailing on the far ocean sea," replied Plantagenet; "we
are all as dead, in the eyes of De Faro and our Monina."

"Faithless girl!"

With a trace of his ancient warmth and sweetness, Edmund entered upon
the gentle maiden's exculpation. He related that a poor fellow lay on
the bed next his in the convent hospital, whom he recognized to be an
Irishman, who had escaped from Waterford, and sailed with them in the
Adalid to Cornwall. From him he heard the tale of what had befallen De
Faro and his child. He heard how the mariner had long haunted the
English coast waiting for an opportunity to carry off the prince; of the
fatal night, when snatching his daughter from the watery peril, he saw
Richard, as he believed, perish in the waves. What more had the Moorish
mariner and his daughter to do with this miserable, guilty island? He
called his men together; he told them his resolve finally to quit the
eastern world for the golden islands of the west, inviting those who
were averse to the voyage to go on shore at once, before the fair wind
that was rising should hurry them into the open sea. The poor Irishman
alone desired to land: before he went he saw the Spanish damsel; he
described her as calm and mild, though there was something unearthly in
her gleaming eyes and in the solemn tone of her voice. "If," she said,
"you meet any of our friends, any who ask for De Faro and his daughter,
if you see Lady Brampton, Lord Barry, or Sir Edmund Plantagenet, tell
them that Monina lives, that she tarries with her father, and tasks
herself to be his comfort and support. We seek the Western Indies; well
may it betide us that we never reach the unknown strand; or we may be
cast away in an uninhabited solitude, where my care and companionship
may stead my dear father much; or I may teach the sacred truths of our
religion to the wild Indians, and speak the dear name of Christ to the
unbaptized of those wilds; or soften, as best I may, the cruel Spaniard,
and save the devoted people from their barbarity. Tell them, whichever
way I look, I perceive a thousand duties to which our great Taskmaster
calls me, and these I live to fulfil, if so my feeble body will permit;
tell them that my only hope is death; that, and that by my obedience to
the Almighty will, I may partly merit to join in Paradise the earthly
angel who now survives there."

Tears choked further speech; she imprinted her words by a gift of gold.
The boat which had been hailed, came alongside. The man on board, the
sails of the Adalid swelled proudly in the gale; the little caravel ran
lightly along on the top of the roughening waters. In less than two
hours she was out of sight, speeding swiftly over the sea towards the
wild western ocean.

Plantagenet departed; and the princess was yet more cheered when she
found that no further injury 'was meditated against her lord.
Imprisonment in the Tower was his sole punishment. Her pure, gentle mind
could not divine the full extent of King Henry's villany, nor guess how
he undermined the edifice he claimed praise for not levelling with the
ground.

Nor could her resigned, patient, feminine spirit conceive the cruel,
biting impatience of his lot that York endured. He had yielded at first
to the overwhelming sense of disgrace, and felt that last, worst emotion
of the injured, which answers the internal question, "What have I done
so to be visited?" in the poet's words,--


                    "I cannot charge
     My memory with much save sorrow--but
     I have been so beyond the common lot
     Chastened and visited, I needs must think
     That I was wicked."


But soon his eager, eagle spirit spurned the tame debasing thought: he
resolved again to struggle, and at last to conquer; the fire burned
brighter for its short smouldering; almost with a light heart he
laughed, as he resolved again to endeavour.

His prison life was more than irksome; it was unendurable. No change,
which is the soul of enjoyment, varied it. No sympathy, the parent of
content, came anear. In his young days he had trod on the verge of
life's wave, watching it recede, and fancying that it would discover
glittering treasures as it retreated into the ocean of eternity: now the
tide ebbed sullenly; the barren sands grew dark; and the expanse before
afforded no hope--what was to be done?

He was in the Tower, whence he had twice escaped; where the earl of
Warwick was immured, pining in fruitless vegetation, rather than living.
Should he do as he had done, and become a cipher, a forgotten prisoner,
a mere thing to wake and sleep, and be as nothing? The very dog that
guards a cottage-door from nightly harm had more dignity and purpose in
his life than this victim of ambition. The bird that alighted on the
sill of his iron-barred casement, and carried off a crumb for her
nestlings, was an emblem of utility and freedom in comparison, which
Warwick, cut off from all, must weep to mark. How different was
Richard's fate; he had dear friends ready to risk all for him, whose
life's sacrifice he could repay only by being true to himself; he had a
wife, wedded to him in youth's early flower, whose happiness was
unalterably linked to his. He had courage, fortitude, energy; he would
not cast these gifts away, a thankless boon: he valued them at their
price: if death crowned his efforts, it were well; he was a mere toy in
the hands of God, and he submitted; but as a man, he was ready to cope
with men, and though defeated never to be vanquished. Not a month after
his removal to the Tower he had observed his facilities, marked his
instruments, and resolved to enter on his schemes: they were quickened
by other circumstances.

Warwick heard of his cousin's arrival; and he believed this to be the
signal of his own deliverance. His first chief desire was to have
communication with him. Among his attendants there was one to whom he
could apply; he was a lank, tall fellow, with little understanding and
but one idea--gratitude to the duke of Clarence. This man, called
Roger, and nicknamed Long Roger, his length being his chief distinction,
had been very poor, and burthened besides with several infant children:
accidents and a bad season brought them to the verge of starvation, when
a chance threw him in the way of the duke of Clarence, who got him made
servitor in the Tower. When this unfortunate prince was imprisoned
within its fatal walls. Long Roger underwent a thousand perils to wait
on him by stealth, and to do what service he might. Long Roger had a
prodigious appetite, and his chief delight was to smuggle dainties,
cooked by his Madge, into the prison chamber of the duke. The manner of
Clarence's death, which Roger affirmed to accord with the popular
tradition, alone consoled the faithful sympathizing fellow. Now he had
turned the key for thirteen years on the duke's hapless son: in spite of
his watchful care and proffered cates, he had seen the poor youth
dwindle to a skeleton, when suddenly the progress of delay was checked
by Our Lady: it was a miracle to see Lord Edward grow fat and comely to
look upon, changing his woe-begone looks into gracious smiles: by the
mass, there was witchcraft in it! Warwick often thanked Long Roger, and
told him what he would do when restored to freedom and rank: which will
never be, Roger said, except among the saints in Paradise; unless it
pleased God to remove his majesty, when my lady the queen should fully
know how fervently her cousin prayed for her; and, forsooth, with sweet
prince Arthur, his royal mother would be all-powerful. Long Roger's
visions went not beyond. He never imagined the possibility of effecting
the earl's escape; his limited understanding suggested no relief, save a
bottle of Canary, or bunches of white roses in June, which in fact was
Dame Madge's feminine idea; and often had the simple flowers soothed
Warwick's care. To this man the poor prisoner applied, to enable him to
see and converse with the newly-arrived Richard: two are better than one
to a feast; and, the next time Roger meditated a dainty supper for his
lord, he resolved to endeavour that York should partake it with him as a
guest.

In his own guileless way, the simple-hearted man began to practise on
and bribe one of his fellows, without whom it had been difficult to
accomplish his desire. Abel Blewet had lately been appointed to his
service: he was nearly a dwarf, with bushy eyebrows and red hair: there
was something of ill omen in his physiognomy, but as the tall yeoman
looked over the head of his comrade, his courage rose: "The
whipper-snapper could not rebuff me," he thought, as he drew himself up
to his full height, and began to propound the mighty deed of conducting
Perkin by mistake to the Lord Edward's chamber, on his return from
vespers. Roger paused suddenly; for, in spite of his stature, he was
appalled by the glance Blewet shot up from under his penthouses of
brows: still he gave a willing assent, and even took upon himself the
chief risk of the undertaking.

The following evening, while Richard was yet pondering how to commence
his machinations, undecided, though resolved; and while he made up his
mind not to betray his thoughts to the sinister-looking being before
him, he was surprised to find that he was led through an unaccustomed
gallery; and still more on entering the chamber into which he was
introduced, to recognise it as that where he had unexpectedly found
refuge during his last visit to the Tower, and to perceive that Warwick
himself was there expecting him.

Was this the thin, wasted being he had seen three years before? Had
Warwick been then set free to hunt upon the hills, he had not regained
more flesh and bloom than now that hope had been his only medicine. His
cousin York had inspired him with marvellous confidence; his last
entrance into the formidable Tower, and his speedy exit, had appeared a
miracle to the poor earl, to whom these high walls and sad chambers
formed a world, from which, as from the larger one, death only promised
egress. He had pined and wasted in his appetite to be free, to be
without those gates, beyond that fosse and giant battlements that girded
him in: these portentous, insuperable obstacles were mere cobweb chains
to Richard. He had come in, he had departed, and all as easily, so
Warwick thought, as the unregarded fly, that had perhaps flown from
Westminster, from Elizabeth's chamber, to light upon his cheek. In all
the subsequent tales of York's checks and overthrow, he smiled at the
idea that one born to victory could be thus overcome. He laughed at the
chains Henry had thrown over him; and his transfer to the Tower elated
him with a firm belief that liberty was at hand. Dwelling on these
thoughts, Warwick ceased to be the dead alive; he was cheerful, erect,
elastic in his gait, his complexion glowed with health, while sickness
lingered still on the cheek of the younger Plantagenet, and a more
subdued spirit dwelt in his heart.

Long Roger beheld the cousins embrace: he heard the earl call him, named
Perkin, his liege, and most dear kinsman: from that moment the
opprobrious name was banished from Roger's lips: he was convinced of
York's truth, and the Lord Edward's friend became an object of reverence
and of love.




CHAPTER LV

ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE


                           Gentle cousin,
     If you be seen, you perish instantly
     For breaking prison.

                     No, no, cousin,
     I will no more be hidden, nor put off
     This great adventure to a second trial.

                                  TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.


Quick on the first greeting followed Warwick's question. "And, noble
cousin, what have you projected? when shall we escape?"

Richard's being in durance with him, seemed sufficient pledge, that
without delay they should both be free. While York, wearied by
opposition to his mighty foe, just foiled in his endeavours to preserve
his freedom, even when he had attained it, saw giant obstacles in his
path; and, although resolved to endeavour all, was fully conscious of
the fatal end that must wait upon his too probable failure. His reply
was dictated by these feelings; he was averse to drag one so
inexperienced, and so unhappy, into the pit he believed that he was
digging for himself. He besought the earl well to weigh the value he set
upon life; to place the fatal scaffold in prospect; to teach himself to
know what death was, and to be ready to meet it, before he planned
escape from the wily Tudor. Warwick listened with impatient wonder; but
when Richard concluded with affirming, that he himself, in sober
sadness, preferred hazarding all to the remaining in prison, and that he
would be free, the earl's countenance again grew light and gladsome.
"But when, coz--when?" was still his eager question.

Thus they had changed characters. Warwick, so many years secluded from
the world, was in total ignorance of its ways. Had the Tower-gates been
opened to him, he had trembled to walk forth alone; but restraint had
made him feminine; and with his cousin he would have rushed upon an army
of spears, in sure belief that some unseen aegis would protect him. His
position rendered him timid, indolent, and dependent; but he relied on
Richard, as a woman on her lover. York beheld all things in their clear,
true light; he was aware of every difficulty; of the means he possessed
for overcoming them, and of the hazards he ran in using these means. A
sentiment, born of the highest generosity made him hesitate before he
concerted any plan with Warwick. It was not alone that he was averse to
risking another life; but he felt that his cause would receive advantage
from this link with an undoubted Plantagenet; nay, that, in the prison
itself, the attachment and respect felt towards the son of Clarence, by
some of the very men he meant to use, would serve him. That he should
reap benefit from exposing the ill-fated prince to untried dangers,
revolted his high and independent nature. Warwick had recourse to many
an entreaty and persuasion, ere he brought Richard to consent that their
fortunes should be joined, and that, last of the White Rose, they would
rise or fall together. Still York was obliged to check his cousin's
impatience, and to show that they must slowly work out the end they had
in view.

To gratify the earl's greedy curiosity, York related his adventures;
they afforded him an inexhaustible fund of surprise and delight. He
sighed over his tale of wedded happiness; and half wondered that angelic
woman, seated high on the throne of loveliness and love, should deign to
devote herself for man. A pang, not of envy, but of regret, on comparing
their fates, shot across him; soon the usual current of feeling
returned; and when he heard that his idolized, lost Elizabeth, was the
friend and companion of the devoted wife of York, his affection for
Richard was increased. Night was far advanced before they separated, and
then only in certain expectation of meeting again.

York's hopes grew brighter, and he indulged in visions of the future,
which lately had been so blank. He verily believed that he might escape,
though still he doubted whether he should. He remembered the fondness of
the duchess of Burgundy for her brother Clarence, and how she had
deplored the hard destiny of his offspring; he would present that son,
liberated by him, to her. His junction with the prince must revive the
old Yorkists in his favour; this worst blast of fortune might be the
gale to speed him to the harbour of his hopes. The royal cousins met
again and again; nor was it long before their own desires, and Henry's
craft, began to weave that fatal web which entangled them even in the
very mode the hard-hearted king devised.

Summer was gone: quicker than he was wont, the sun withdrew his
embattled array of light and heat; and cold and tempest, erewhile driven
to mountain fastnesses, or to their own frozen kingdoms in the north,
took courage and force, and broke with wild fury upon the defenceless
world: the bleak winds were their coursers; savagely they yelled and
howled over the land they desolated. First, the growth of flowers was
their prey; the fruits, and then the verdure of the earth, while the
sun, each day retreating, afforded further scope to their inroads. York
resolved not to pass another winter in prison. He had quickly perceived
that his purpose could only be effected by corrupting their guards, and
then all would depend upon the fidelity of these men. His first attempts
were followed by an almost too easy success: good-hearted, dull-headed
Long Roger heard with unreplying credulity the assertions of Warwick,
that Richard must succeed in all he undertook, and readily promised his
aid. Abel Blewet, in spite of his dogged, sinister aspects yielded at
once to the seduction of a promised bribe. Two others, by his advice,
were associated as necessary to their success. Strangeways, a ruffling
drunken fellow, who had been thrice dismissed, but whose pretty wife
each time procured his reappointment; and Astwood, a saving miser, who
lent money to his fellow-servitors on usury. With these instruments the
cousins went to work. Warwick in full belief of success: York,
perceiving treason and discovery close to them, but ready to defy these
bloodhounds to their worst.

"And now, coz," said Warwick, "in very truth there needs no further
delay. Methinks were the drawbridge down, you would mistrust some gin,
and wait to throw an arch of your own across the moat. Sooth, my lord, I
am a weary of your sloth."

There was a caressing sweetness in Warwick's voice and manner: an
ignorant, indolent, confiding enthusiasm, so unlike quick-witted
Clifford, or any of Duke Richard's former friends, that he felt a new
emotion towards him--hitherto he had been the protected, served, and
waited on, of his associates, now he played the protector and the
guardian.

"My gentle cousin," he replied, "even as you trust, so you shall find
me--wait but a little, and all will be past. Yet I grieve to say, where
you see escape, I perceive an ambushment of death; and, though ready to
face the grim skeleton, we must arm ourselves against him. I wish I
could show you even as I see, the dangers that environ us--perhaps you
would shrink; and it is yet time. What do you do? Not only plan escape,
but ally yourself, and give the sanction of your untarnished name, to
one whom Tudor brands as an impostor, and abhors as a rival. His
vengeance will fall heavily for this deed, if he reach you. While a few
years, like the many already gone by, may lead him to his grave, and you
to liberty. I have too often met danger to be frightened by him: and I
endure worse than death, each day I pass of youth, apart my sweet White
Rose. You have no lady-love to beckon you across the path of peril.
Bethink you well, my ever dear lord, will you not regret this prison,
when the cruel axe glitters before your eyes?"

"Do you refuse then to take me with you?" said Warwick, mournfully.

"Be the choice yours; to go with me is fraught with danger--to stay--"

"Hush, cousin!" cried the earl, eagerly, "speak not the ill-omened word.
Stay,--to endure days and nights of guarded doors; to eat viands served
up poisoned by the jailor's touch; to see the sky but through those iron
bars; alas! in my dreams, when heaven and its stars are before me, they
are crossed and paled by those accursed lines. Give me but an hour to
tread earth a free man--or, mark, cousin; sometimes I win good Roger to
lead me to the roof of the White Tower; it is high, and overhangs the
deep, dangerous river--the day you quit my side, I seek that tower, I
leap from its height, and the cold waters shall drink up my being,
rather than I endure another hour my prison-life."

"My dear, dear cousin," said York, "it is written by the Fates, and I
yield--our fortunes shall be one. A few days now brings the hour; it
will move along the dial; it will become a portion of past time--what
it will leave us, is in the hands of God."

That hour came--full soon it came--the evening hour which preceded
their escape. Long Roger served supper to the kinsmen, the last they
were to partake within the fated walls. The poor fellow heaved a bitter
sigh, as he waited by his lord's chair. "Thou art downcast, good Roger,"
said the earl, "pledge me, my man, in this ruby wine of Burgundy--think
of to-morrow, not of to-night--to-morrow the deed will be done."

Roger quaffed the proffered bowl--he set it down with another sigh,
almost a groan, adding, "Better drown reason than life in the vat!" Then
recollecting to what he alluded, and before whom, he blushed scarlet to
his very ears, and like a bashful man he made it worse by going on
blunderingly, "I was never handy at these sort of things; it is for all
the world like turning out of a warm bed on a cold snowy morning, only
to think of them--and when they are about,--by the Cross, I thought no
hole far enough or dark enough, when my lord your father--"

"Roger!" exclaimed Warwick.

The wine had not decreased the man's terror, but it had opened his
mouth, and taken away his discretion; he continued: "It was an awful
night. We all knew what was going to be done. I am sure, as Thomas
Paulet said, we heard our very hearts beat. Then there was grim-faced
Hobler, who at the judgment might be taken for the born twin of Master
Abel, only he was taller by a span--even he looked uglier, nor spoke
above his breath--'Is he at his prayers?' asked he, and Sir Brakenbury
was as white as the earth itself--it was the beginning of Lent; and the
snow lay three feet deep on it."

By no uncommon law of our nature, the dread design of the present night
awoke keen recollection in the usually drowsy mind of this man. At
first, with thrilling horror, Warwick interrupted him, but now the very
terrors of the theme he chose assumed an awful charm--he was fascinated
to listen, while his knees knocked together. Richard felt also the magic
of such perilous excitement.

"Oh, Lord Edward," continued Roger, "these walls have seen fiendly
sights--the blood of many a Plantagenet, York, or Lancaster, is on its
pavement. Was it not in this room that the pious king Saint Henry, as
Father Piers calls him--you will not sleep another night in it, so
there is no harm now, telling you that his poor ghost has been seen on
the battlements coming from this very chamber, where he was murthered."

The night wind rushed round the massy walls, the autumnal wind, fierce
and howling--York started up. "No more of this unreason, while we need
all our strength, and God's grace to boot, to nerve us to our task. Oh,
ghost of Lancaster! if indeed thou hauntest this spot, where those akin
to me did the foul deed, be thy pious soul propitiated now; many a mass
shall be told for thy repose?"

Roger crossed himself, and said an Ave; then in his usual voice he
rejoined, Would the thing did not require blood. Master Abel vows by
the saints--'twere better when men make bad oaths to swear by the
fiends--that Sir John must die; old wrinkled Astwood squeaks out, "By'r
Lady, it were not worth while, with only promises for reward, if we have
not the rifling of the lieutenant's private chamber. They are
bloody-minded men, my lord; Mat Strangeways, when he is sober, and I,
fasting or feasting, hold out that we might bind him, and get the keys.'
'Blockhead,' says Master Blewet, saving your presence, 'thou goest the
way to hang us all.'"

Another goblet had set Roger talking. Warwick had quitted the table. He
threw open the casement: it was very dark, and the wind howled
fearfully--"Oh, iron bars of my prison-house," cried the ill-fated
prince, "can only midnight-murder wrench ye asunder? It is a dread act
to disobey God's word, and lay the soul under mortal sin--must it be
done?"

"My dear cousin," said York, "do not mistake--a month ago the choice
was yours; now there is no going back. We have no right to draw these
poor men into peril, and then to quarrel at the precaution they take for
their safeties. We said, ay, when the matter was proposed. Again I
repeat the word; they must look to it, who so savagely have driven us to
the fatal pass. When Digby undertook the ungentle task of jailor, he
knew that he must hold it at the hazard of his life."

"Sir John has ever been kind tome," said Warwick, "forgive the word, my
lord, I am firm now--away with mercy! To win an easy egress from these
murderous walls, I could myself plant the dagger."

"We are not executioners," interrupted the duke, who felt none of
Warwick's vacillations, now sinking beneath the required tone, now wound
up far above it, and was perfectly calm, though his heart, he scarce
knew why, entertained no hope of success. Warwick believed that he
should win, and mourned the losers in the frightful game. Richard knew
that he might fail, and assuredly would, did he not meet each necessity
and hazard with a dauntless spirit.

The sound of a bell from a neighbouring convent was brought fitfully by
the wind--"They are ringing matins--there is our signal," cried Roger.

"And Digby's knell." The door of the chamber opened as Warwick said
these words, and Blewet, with his usual catlike pace, slid in; he walked
straight up to Roger, and casting on him a glance from under his brows,
said only, "Come."

"Are all at rest?" asked the earl.

"Two hours agone," said Master Abel, "I have kept myself awake
sharpening my steel:" he touched the handle of a huge butcher's knife
stuck in his girdle, whose glittering blade did credit to his care.
Warwick turned pale and sick. "It will be dulled anon," continued
Blewet.

"Where are thy comrades?" Richard asked.

"They wait at the end of the corridor--Master Astwood is counting his
gains. Come, Long Roger."

Poor Roger followed him to the door, then turning to the princes; "My
royal masters," said he, "if this deed goes ill, and I never see ye
more, by Christ and his Cross, I pray a blessing on ye; if I may pray,
but by the mass I fear I shall never pray, nor sup more."

They were gone--Warwick strove to look, to be firm, but he grew ashy
white--a door clapped to at a distance made him almost faint. Richard
was pale also; but his hand shook not in the least, as he presented a
cup of wine to his cousin. "Give me water rather," said the earl,
shuddering, "that cup is red--hark--it is his groans!"

"It is the wind around the turret, where my liege and brother died,"
said York, endeavouring to give other thoughts to the poor prince, who
cried,--

"It is the hell-born laugh of fiends viewing the deed." With the breeze
indeed came a sound of laughter. "Are we betrayed!" cried York: but the
sound passed away in wailing. Warwick was on his knees--"I cannot
pray," he cried, "a sea of blood is before me."

"Hush!"

Steps now approached along the corridor, and Blewet, his stained,
half-wiped knife in his hand, appeared--Again the monosyllable "Come,"
was pronounced--fraught with how different a meaning. A life had been
torn from an innocent breast since then by that fell instrument. The
princes, awe-struck, one trembling with dread, the other striving to
quell his horror for a murderer, followed him, as he led through the
gallery--at the end stood Astwood with a bunch of keys--there were no
stains on his hands; he looked anxious, but brightened up when he saw
the prisoners.

They trod stealthily along. Warwick's faltering steps scarce kept pace
with their conductor's. After passing through many narrow high passages,
they reached a low postern door. Astwood put the key in the lock--the
sound was magical to the fearful earl. "Farewell, old frightful walls,"
he cried; "farewell, dark murderous prison-house, the Foul Fiend possess
thee! such is my benison."

Blewet looked at him--York marked the sarcasm, the scorn of his
glance--the gate meanwhile was opened; at that moment a clash of arms
was heard. "The sentinels at the eastern gate," remarked Abel.

"God grant it!" cried Warwick, "God grant--yet can it be! and am I
free?"

He rushed through the open door, intent to seize upon liberty, as
Tantalus on his forbidden feast--his first step beyond the threshold of
his prison was followed by a shriek--almost a woman's shriek, it was so
shrill and piercing. What he quailed before, gave presence of mind to
York--experienced in ills. Whatever the new evil might be, he went out
to meet it calmly. A party of archers and yeomen were drawn up in the
courtyard. "This truly is a mime," he said, "in which one at least wins.
Our good lieutenant is safe; we are lost."

Grim Sir John had much disliked even this masque of murder. He saw their
seizure with a grin of delight. He abhorred Richard, as the prime mover
of the meditated assassination; but he hated Warwick more, who thus
could lay in ambush for the life of one, who he believed had been a most
courteous and soft-hearted jailor to him--he commanded his myrmidons to
lead the royal kinsmen to the strongest ward-rooms of the Tower, with
dogged, savage joy.

In dark and separate cells, in solitude and night, these ill-fated
victims of craft and ambition were consigned to biting reflection and
sinister anticipation. Warwick, worn out by the unusual excitement of
the last weeks, by his eager hopes, and overwhelming despair, had no one
thought, but ten thousand thoughts, making a chaos and hell of his poor
heart. Richard felt more for his cousin than for himself. "But for me,"
he repeated internally, "he had still been a patient prisoner. Yet to
break prison is not crime capital--he may yet be saved. Elizabeth will
intercede; Tudor, for very shame, cannot do further wrong to one so near
akin, so powerless and unfortunate. For myself:--I am dead already: the
duke of York died, when first I became a slave. So that my memory
survive in my own White Rose's heart--let the victor dispose at his
pleasure of this mere shell of Richard."




CHAPTER LVI

THE TRIAL


     Tempestuous Fortune hath spent all her spite,
       And thrilling sorrow thrown his utmost dart
     Thy sad tongue cannot tell more heavy plight
       Than that I feel and harbour in my heart.

                                               SPENSER.


The morning of the first of November dawned: a cheery day. Men went to
their usual works: the earth, despoiled of her summer garniture, yet
bore the change with sober content; for the sun shone, and soft airs,
despite the coming winter, lightly shook the scant and altered foliage
of the woods:--


     All rose to do the task He set to each,
     Who shaped us to His ends, and not our own.
                         And many rose
     Whose woe was such, that fear became desire.


Among such fate-hunted victims was the duke of York. Hope had died in
his heart; and his few remaining days were only to be spent in
celebrating her dark funeral. Morning opened its eyes on Prince
Richard's dungeon, showing him vanquished by grievous overthrow and
change. To look back through his tumultuous life, to dwell upon its
chances, to think of the many who had suffered for him, were sad but
fitting thoughts, to which he betook himself, till death became lovely
in his eyes. But intermingled with such retrospection were other
memories: his own sweet love was before him, in her tears or smiles; he
looked into her dear eyes, he closed his own, and thrilling kisses
pressed his burning lips, and soft, white arms were round him; at
thought of such he grew impatient of his chains, and the fearful cutting
off from all that awaited him. He began to calculate on the probability
that his life would be spared, and grew cowardly the while; to feed upon
those roseate lips, to drink life from those eyes, to clasp his
beautiful, fond wife, feeling that beyond the circle of his arms nought
existed worthy his desires, became a fierce, impatient hunger, to
gratify which he would call himself impostor, give up fame and
reputation, and become Perkin Warbeck in all men's eyes.

There was but one refuge from this battle of youth and life with the
grim skeleton. With a strong effort he endeavoured to turn his attention
from earth, its victor woes, and still more tyrant joys, to the heaven
where alone his future lay. The struggle was difficult, but he effected
it: prayer brought resignation, calm; so when his soul, still linked to
his mortal frame, and slave to its instincts, again returned to earth,
it was with milder wishes and subdued regrets. Monina's lovely form
wandered into his mind; she was an angel now, a blessed spirit, he
believed; for, what deceived her, deceived him; and he fancied that he
alone had escaped from the watery perils of that night: she had arrived
there, where he soon should be, in the serene immutability of eternal
life; he began, in the revulsion of his thoughts, to pity those destined
still to exist. Earth was a scathed planet, a roofless, shelterless
home; a wild where the human soul wandered a little interval, tortured
by sharp, cruel storms; lost in thorny, entangled brakes; weary
repining, till the hour came when it could soar to its native
birthplace, and find refuge from its ills in promised Paradise.

His cell was indeed the haven of peace, compared to the turbid,
frightful atmosphere in which his Katherine lived. Edmund had not
returned; every attempt she made to communicate with Scotland or
Burgundy failed. She had passed a summer of wretchedness, nor could the
tender attention of Elizabeth soothe her. In spite of all, the poor
queen was almost happier than she had ever been; for many years she had
been "the cannibal of her own heart," devouring her griefs in voiceless,
friendless, solitude; her very joys, and they were those of maternity,
were locked up in her own bosom. It was the birth of happiness to share
her griefs with another; that other being so gentle, so wise, and yet so
sensitive, as the fair White Rose, who concealed her own worst pains, to
soothe those of one possessing less fortitude and fewer internal
resources than herself. Yet, while thus she forgot herself, she never
quitted in thought her Richard's side; since the day she had seen him
delivered over to ignominious punishment, pale and ill, he was as it
were stamped on every outward object, an image placed between her and
her thoughts; for, while those were employed apparently on many things,
he, in truth, was their first, last, all-possessing idea, more
engrossing than her own identity. At one time she spent every effort to
obtain an interview with him in prison; and then she learned, through
covert means, of the plots carrying on in the Tower for his escape,
while the name of Warwick, mingling in the tale, roused the latent
feelings of Elizabeth. When the last, worst hour came, it was less
replete with pain than these miserable, unquiet days, and sleepless,
tearful nights; the never-ending, still-beginning round of hours, spent
in fear, doubt, and agonizing prayer.

After a restless night, the princess opened her eyes upon the day, and
felt even the usual weight at her heavy foreboding heart increased. The
tale was soon told of Richard's attempted escape and failure: "What can
be done?" "Nothing; God has delivered the innocent into the hands of the
cruel; the cruel, to whom mercy is as unknown as, methinks, it is even
to the awful Power who rules our miserable lives." Such words, with a
passionate burst of tears, burst from the timid Elizabeth, whose crushed
and burning heart even arraigned the Deity for the agony she endured.

Katherine looked on her with sweet compassion, "Gentle one," she said,
"what new spirit puts such strange speech into your mouth, whose
murmurings heretofore were those of piety?"

"It is a bad world," continued the queen; "and, if I become bad in it,
perchance I shall prosper, and have power to save: I have been too mild,
too self-communing and self-condemning; and the frightful result is,
that the sole being that ever loved me, perishes on the scaffold. Both
will perish, my White Rose, doubt it not. Your own York, and my devoted
only loved Edward. In his prison I have been his dream; he breaks it,
not to find liberty again, but Elizabeth. Wretched boy! knows he not
that he shall never again find her, who roamed with a free spirit the
woodland glades, talking to him of the future, as of a scene painted to
my will; faded, outworn, a degraded slave--I am not Elizabeth."

"Did you know the dearest truth of religion," replied Katherine, "you
would feel that she, who has been tried, and come out pure, is a far
nobler being than--"

"I am not pure, not innocent; much you mistake me," said the queen:
"wicked, impious thoughts harbour in my heart, and pollute my soul, even
beyond the hope of mediation. Sometimes I hate my beautiful children
because they are his; sometimes in the dark hour of night, I renounce my
nuptial vow, and lend ready, willing ear to fiendish whisperings which
borrow Edward's voice. I court sleep, because he wanders into my dreams:
and--what do I say, what am I revealing? Lady, judge me not: you
married him you loved, fulfilling thus the best destiny that can be
given in this hard world to woman, whose life is merely love. Though he
perish in his youth, and you weep for him for ever, hug yourself in the
blessed knowledge that your fate is bright as angels: for we reap
celestial joys, when love and duty, twined in sisterly embrace, take up
their abode together within us: and I--but Katherine, did you hear
me?--They perish even as I speak: his cruel heart knows no touch of
mercy, and they perish."

"They shall not, dearest," said York's White Rose; "it cannot be, that
so foul a blot darken our whole lives. No; there are words and looks and
tones that may persuade. Alas! were we more holy, surely a miracle might
be vouchsafed, nor this Pharaoh harden his heart for ever."

All her love-laden soul beaming in her eyes, with a voice that even
thrilled him, though it moved him not, the White Rose addressed Henry.
She had yet to learn that a tyrant's smile is more fatal than his frown:
he was all courtesy, for he was resolved, implacable; and she gathered
hope from what proved to be the parent of despair. She spoke with so
much energy, yet simplicity, in the cause of goodness, and urged so
sweetly her debt of gratitude; telling him, how from the altar of their
hearts, prayers would rise to the Eternal, fraught with blessings to
him, that he encouraged her to go on, that still he might gaze on
lineaments, which nobility of soul, the softest tenderness, and exalted
belief in good, painted with angelic hues. At length he replied that his
council were examining witnesses, that her cause depended on facts, on
its own justice; that he hoped report had blackened the crimes of these
rash men; for her sake he sincerely hoped their guilt, as it was
detailed to him, had been exaggerated.

For a moment the princess was unaware what all this jargon might mean;
his next words were more perspicuous. "Indeed, fair dame, you must
forget this coil: if I consent, for the welfare of my kingdom, to
sacrifice the queen's nearest relative, you also must resign yourself to
a necessity from which there is no appeal. Hereafter you will perceive
that you gain, instead of losing by an act of justice which you
passionately call cruelty: it is mercy, heaven's mercy doubtless, that
breaks the link between a royal princess and a base-born impostor."

A sudden fear thrilled Katherine: "You cannot mean that he should die,"
she cried; "for your own sake, for your children's sake, on whom your
sins will be visited, you cannot intend such murder: you dare not; for
the whole world would rise against the unchristian king who sheds his
kinsman's blood. All Europe, the secret hearts of those nearest to you,
your own knowledge, all proclaim your victim, your rival--to be your
brother, and will brand you a fratricide. You are Lancaster, your
ancestors were kings, you conquered this realm in their name, and may
reign over it in peace of conscience; but not so may you destroy the
duke of York. His mother avouched him, the duchess of Burgundy
acknowledges him; I was given to him by my royal cousin, as to one of
equal rank, and he upholds him. More than all, his princely self
declares the truth; nor can evil counsellors, nor false chroniclers,
stand between you and heaven and the avenging world. You vainly seek to
heap accusation on him you term Crookback's head: time will affix the
worst indelible stain upon you. You cannot, will not slay him."

What were words to the fixed mind of Henry? A summer breeze, whispering
round a tempest-withstanding watch-towers--he might grow chill at this
echo of the fears his own heart spoke: but still he smiled, and his
purpose was unshaken. It became known that the princes were to be
arraigned for treason: first the unhappy, misnamed Perkin was tried, by
the common courts, in Westminster Hall. When a despot gives up the
execution of his revenge to the course of law, it is only because he
wishes to get rid of passing the sentence of death upon his single
authority, and to make the dread voice of misnamed justice, and its
executors, the abettors of his crime.

When tragedy arrays itself in the formal robes of law, it becomes more
heart-rending, more odious, than in any other guise. When sickness
threatens to deprive us of one, round whom our heart-strings have
twined--we think inextricably--the skill of man is our friend: if
merciless tempest be the murderer, we feel that it obeys One whose ways
are inscrutable, while we strive to believe that they are good. Groping
in darkness, we teach our hearts the bitter lesson of resignation. Nor
do we hate nor blame the wild winds and murderous waves, though they
have drunk up a life more precious and more beloved than words have
power to speak. But that man's authority should destroy the life of his
fellow-man; that he who is powerful, should, for his own security and
benefit, drive into the darksome void of the tomb one united to our
sun-visited earth by ties of tenderness and love--one whose mind was
the abode of honour and virtue; to know that the word of man could still
bind to its earthly tabernacle the being, voice, looks, thoughts,
affections of our all; and yet that the man of power unlocks the secret
chamber, rifles it of all its treasures, and gives us, for the living
mansion of the soul, a low, voiceless grave:--against such tyranny, the
softest heart must rebel; nor scarcely could religion in its most
powerful guise, the Catholic religion, which almost tore aside for its
votaries the veil between time and eternity, teach submission to the
victims.

Days flowed on. However replete with event, the past is but a point to
us; however empty, the present pervades all things. And when that
present is freighted with our whole futurity, it is as an adamantine
chain binding us to the hour; there is no escape from its omnipotence
and omnipresence; it is as the all-covering sky. We shut our eyes; the
monster's hollow breath is on our cheek; we look on all sides: from each
his horrid eyes glare on us; we would sleep; he whispers dreams. Are we
intelligible? Will those possessed by present tell us whether any
bondage, any Bastille, can suggest ideas of more frightful tyranny,
misery, than the cruel present, which clings to us, and cannot be
removed.

"It is so; he attempted to escape, and was discovered; he is low in his
dungeon; his dear eyes are faint from disappointed hope. He will be
tried. Tyranny will go forth in a masque, and with hideous antics fancy
that she mantles with a decorous garb her blood-thirsty acts. He will be
condemned; but he will not die! not die! Oh no, my Richard is
immortal--he cannot die!"

"My royal cousin, when you gave me to my sweet love, and pledged your
word that in weal or woe I should be his; and I promised myself still
dearer things, to be the guardian angel and tutelar genius of his life;
and took pleasure, fond, foolish girl that I was, in the anticipation of
misfortunes that I should rob of all power to hurt; no thought, among
the many that strayed into futurity, told me of this desertion, this
impotence of effecting good. Alas! how deaf and cruel man is: I could
more easily tear asunder his prison-walls with my hands, and break with
my weak fingers his iron chains, than move one, as liable to suffer and
to die as even his victim, to pity!"

Elizabeth listened pale and silent to these complaints--bitter as they
were, they were hushed to more heart-rending silence when the hour of
trial came--she should only pray to die, before the word that spoke his
condemnation met her ear. Accustomed as a princess--a high-born and
respected daughter of one most powerful, to be obeyed and served; to
find herself destitute of all influence, seemed to place her in another
planet--it was not men--not her fellow-creatures that were around her;
but fiends who wore the mask of humanity. An uninhabited desert had not
been more solitary than this populous land, whose language she possessed
not; for what is language, if it reach not the heart and move it?

Richard, the wonder of the time, gathered courage as ill-fortune pressed
more hardly upon him; in the hour of trial he did not quail, but stood
in bold, fearless innocence before the men, whose thoughts were armed
against his life. He was not guilty, he said, for he could not be guilty
of treason. When the indictment was read which treated him as a
foreigner and an alien, the spirit of the Plantagenet flashed from his
eyes, and the very stony-hearted clerk, who read, casting his regards on
him, faltered and stammered, overawed by a blaze of dignity, which, did
we foster antique creeds, we might believe was shed over him by some
such spirit as imparted divine majesty to the person of the king of
Ithaca. Proudly and silently Richard listened to the evidence on his
trial. It touched only on such points as would afterwards be most
material for inculpation of poor Warwick. In the end he was asked what
he had to plead, wherefore judgment should not pass upon him--but he
was bid to be brief, and to beware not to use any language derogatory to
the high and mighty prince Henry king of these realms. A smile curled
his lips at this admonition, and with even a playful air he said, "My
very good lord, I ask for nothing, save that a little mercy be extended
to the memory of my gracious uncle, my lord of Gloucester, who was no
child-murderer."

At the word he was interrupted, and sentence pronounced. As the
ignominious words were said, Richard, who from the beginning had
abstracted himself in prayer, so that his ears might be as little
wounded as possible, by an unconquerable impulse put his hand where his
sword might have been. Its absence and the clanking of his chains
recalled him to the truth, and he muttered the words, "O basely murdered
York!" in recollection of his unhappy grandfather, to whose miserable
fate he often recurred, as an example of suffering and patience.

Thus ended the bitter scene; one he had long expected, for which he had
nerved himself. During nearly the whole, his look was as if he were
absent from it. But who could read the secrets of his heart, while his
impassive eyes and lips were no index to the agonies that tortured it?




CHAPTER LVII

THE PRISON OF LUDGATE


                    So young to go
     Under the obscure, cold, rotting, wormy ground!
     To be nailed down into a narrow place;
     To see no more sweet sunshine; hear no more
     Blithe voice of living thing; muse not again
     Upon familiar thoughts, sad, yet thus lost--
     How fearful!

                                            SHELLEY.


"Speak to me, lady, sister, speak! your frozen glances frighten me; your
fingers, as I touch them, have no resistance or life. Dearest and best,
do not desert me--speak but one word, my own White Rose."

Katherine raised her blue eyes heavenward: as if the effort were too
great, they fell again on the ground, as she said, in a voice so low
that Elizabeth could hardly catch the sound: "I must see him once again
before he dies."

"And you shall, dearest, I promise you. Cheer up, my love, not to
affright him by looks like these. Indeed you shall see him, and I will
also; he shall know that he has a sister's prayers, a sister's love.
Patience, sweet Kate, but a little patience."

"Would I could sleep till then!" replied the miserable wife: and she
covered her face with her hands, as if to shut out the light of day, and
sighed bitterly.

When our purposes are inflexible, how do insurmountable obstacles break
before our strong will; so that often it seems that we are more
inconstant than fortune, and that with perseverance we might attain the
sum of our desires. The queen, the weak, despised, powerless queen,
resolved to gratify this one last wish of her beloved friend. Many a
motive urged her to it; compassion, love, and even self-interest. At
first she almost despaired; while Richard continued in the Tower it was
impossible; but on the twenty-third of November, two days before the
destined termination of his fatal tragedy, on the day of the trial of
poor Warwick, he was removed to the prison of Ludgate. And here, at dead
of night, Henry, being absent inspecting his new palace at Richmond,
Elizabeth, timid, trembling, shrinking now at the last--and Katherine,
far too absorbed in one thought to dream of fear, took boat at
Westminster, and were rowed along the dark, cold tide to Blackfriars.
They were silent; the queen clasped her friend's hand, which was chill
and deathlike. Elizabeth trembled, accustomed to hope for, to seek
refuge in her stronger mind, she felt deserted, now that she, engrossed
by passion, silent and still, the wife of the near prey of death, could
remember only that yet for a little while he was alive. Their short
voyage seemed endless; still the oars splashed, still the boat glided,
and yet they arrived not. Could it last for ever--with one hope ever in
view, never to know that he was dead? The thought passed into
Katherine's mind with the sluggish but absorbing tenacity of intense
grief, and at last possessed it so wholly, that it was with a scream of
fear that she found herself close to shore.

The necessity of motion restored Katherine to her presence of mind,
while it deprived the queen of the little courage she possessed.
Something was to be said and done: Elizabeth forgot what; but Katherine
spoke in a clear, though unnatural voice, and followed their conductors
with a firm step, supporting the faltering queen. Yet she addressed her
not; her energies were wound up to achieve one thing; more than that it
would have cost her life to attempt. They reached the dark walls of
the prison; a door was unbarred, and they were admitted. The princess
passed the threshold with a quick step, as if overjoyed thus to be
nearer her wish. Elizabeth paused, trembled, and almost wished to turn
back.

They crossed the high-walled court, and passed through several dark
galleries: it seemed as if they would never arrive; and yet both started
when they stopped at the door of a cell.

"Does his grace expect us?" asked Katherine.

The turnkey looked as not understanding; but their guides who was the
chaplain of the jail, answered,--

"He does not. Fearful that some impediment might intervene, unwilling to
disturb by a disappointed hope a soul so near its heavenly home, I have
told him nothing."

"Gently then," said Katherine, "let our speech be low."

The door opened, and displayed the sou of the proud, luxurious Edward,
sleeping on a wretched mattress, chained to the pavement. The ladies
entered alone. Katherine glided noiselessly to his side; her first act
was to bend down her cheek, till his breath disturbed the ringlet that
rested on it; thus to assure herself that life was within his lips.
Elizabeth fixed her earnest gaze on him, to discover if in aught he
reminded her of the blue-eyed, flaxen-haired bridegroom of Anne Mowbray:
he more resembled a picture of her father in his early manhood; and then
again her aunt the duchess of Burgundy, whom she had seen just before
king Edward's death. He lay there in placid sleep; thought and feeling
absent: yet in that form resided the soul of Richard; a bright casket
containing a priceless gem: no flaw--no token of weakness or decay. He
lived--and at a word would come back from oblivion to her world of
love. A few days and that form would still exist in all its fair
proportion. But veil it quick; he is not there; unholy and false is the
philosophy that teaches us that lurid mockery was the thing we
loved.

And now he woke, almost to joy; yet sadness succeeded quickly to
rapture. "My poor girl," he said, "weep not for me; weep for thyself
rather; a rose grafted on a thorn. The degraded and disgraced claims no
such sorrow."

Katherine replied by an embrace; by laying her beautiful head on his
bosom, and listening with forgetful, delicious ecstasy to the throbbings
of his beating heart.

"Be not unjust to thyself," said a soft, unknown voice, breaking the
silence of the lovers; "be not false to thy house. We are a devoted
race, my brother; but we are proud even to the last."

"This is a new miracle," cried the prince. "Who, except this sainted
one, will claim kindred with Tudor's enemy?"

"Tudor's wife; your sister. Do you not remember Elizabeth?"

As these words were said, Katherine, who appeared to have accomplished
her utmost wish, sat beside him, her arms around him, her sweet head
reposing, her eyes closed. Kissing her soft hair and fair brow, York
disentwined her clasped hands, and rose, addressing the trembling
queen:--

"My sister," he said, "you do a deed which calls for blessings from
heaven upon you and yours. Till now, such, was my unmanly spirit, the
stigma affixed to my name, the disgrace of my ignominious death, made me
odious to myself. The weakness of that thought is past; the love of this
sweetest sweet, and your kindness restore me. Indeed, my sister, I am
York--I am Plantagenet."

"As such," replied the queen, "I ask a boon, for which, selfish as I am,
I chiefly came; my brother will not deny me?"

"Trifler, this is vanity. I can give nothing."

"Oh, everything," exclaimed the lady; "years of peace, almost of
happiness, in exchange for a life of bitter loneliness and suffering.
You, my dearest lord, know the celestial goodness of that fair White
Rose; in adversity and peril you have known it;--I, amidst the cold
deceits of a court. She has vowed never to return to her native land, to
bear a questioned name among her peers; or perhaps to be forced by her
father to change it for one abhorred. Though she must hate me as the
wife of her injurer, yet where can she better be than with your sister?
She would leave me, for I am Tudor's queen; bid her stay with, her
lord's nearest kinswoman; tell her that we will beguile the long years
of our too young life with talk of you; tell her that nowhere will she
find one so ready to bless your name as poor Elizabeth; implore her, ah!
on my knees do I implore you to bid her not to leave me, a dead-alive, a
miserable, bereft creature, such, as I was ere I knew her love."

"What say'st thou, sweet?" asked Richard; "am I yet monarch of that soft
heart? Will my single subject obey the crownless Richard?"

Katherine stretched out her hand to the queen, who was at York's feet,
in token of compliance: she could not speak; it was a mighty effort to
press the fingers of Elizabeth slightly; who said,--

"Before heaven and your dear lord, I claim your promise; you are mine
for ever."

"A precious gift, my Bess; was it not thus my infant lips called you? I
trust her to you; and so the sting of death is blunted. Yet let not too
fond a lingering on one passed away, tarnish the bright hours that may
yet be in store for her. Forget me, sweet ones; I am nought; a vapour
which death and darkness inhales--best unremembered. Yet while I live I
would ask one question--our victim-cousin, Edward of Warwick?"

Elizabeth could no longer restrain her tears as she related, that
however weak Warwick might heretofore have seemed, he appeared a
Plantagenet on his trial. He disdained the insulting formalities of law,
where the bitter Lancastrian, Lord Oxford, was the interpreter of
justice; he at once declared himself guilty of plotting to put the
English crown on the head of his cousin, the duke of York. He was
quickly interrupted, and condemned to be beheaded.

"Generous, unhappy Warwick. Ah! is not life a misery, when all of good,
except ye two angelic creatures, die?"

The signal was now given that the interview must end. Elizabeth wept.
Katherine, still voiceless, clung closer to her husband; while he nerved
himself to support these gentle spirits with manly fortitude. One long,
affectionate kiss he pressed on the mouth of Katherine; and as her
roseate lips yet asked another, another and another followed; their
lives mingled with their breath.

"We meet in Paradise, mine only one," whispered York: "through our
Lord's mercy assuredly we meet there."

He unwound her arms; he placed her in those of Elizabeth, "Cherish,
preserve her. Bless thee, my sister; thee, and thy children. They at
least will, by my death, reign rightfully over this kingdom. Farewell."

He kissed her hand, and then again the lifeless hand of his wife, who
stood a breathing statue. She had not spoken; no words could utter her
despair. Another moment, and their fair forms were gone; the door of his
cell was closed; and, but for the presence of the God he worshipped,
Richard was left alone to solitude and night.




CHAPTER LVIII

CONCLUSION


     Love is too young to know what conscience is,
     Yet who knows not. Conscience is born of Love?
     Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
     Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.

                                                 SHAKSPEARE.


Time,[2] we are told by all philosophers, is the sole medicine for
grief. Yet there are immortal regrets which must endure while we exist.
Those who have met with one, with whose every feeling and thought their
thoughts and feelings were entwined, who knew of no divided past, nor
could imagine a solitary futurity, to them what balm can time bring?
Time, the giver of hours, months, and years, each one how barren,
contemptible, and heavy to bear to the bereft!

There was no consolation for Katherine, which could make her for a
moment forget that her present existence was but the lees of life, the
spiritless remnants of a nectareous draught. But Katherine was gentle,
good, and resigned; she lived on, dispensing pleasure, adored by all who
approached her, and gladly hailing any visitation of happiness which
might reach one whose affections were too fondly linked to the grave.

Years had passed since the last act of the sad tragedy which destroyed
her dearest hopes. She accompanied the queen of England on a progress
made by her, and they remained one night at Eastwell Place, the seat of
Sir Thomas Moyle. There was a park, and stately pleasure-grounds
belonging to the house, undulating uplands, shady copses, and sweet
running brooks to diversify the scene. A crowd of the noble and the gay
were there, and the royal party was unusually mirthful; fireworks,
masks, and dances were employed; and all joyously gave themselves up to
the spirit of the hour. The chords of a harp, a well-known air, first
awoke in the bosom of the White Rose that languid melancholy, so near
allied to pleasure, so close a neighbour to pain. By degrees memory grew
busy in her brain; she could no longer endure the laughter of her
companions, their sallies, nay, nor their kindness; for Elizabeth
perceived her dear friend's change of countenance, and was approaching,
when Katherine, making her a sign not to remark her, stole away, and
entering a straggling path, wandered on, struggling with the tears,
which the beauty of the evening, and the very hilarity which just before
she had shared, caused to gush warm and fast from her eyes.

She reached a little streamlet, and was passing forward, when she became
aware of the presence of another in the scene. A labouring man, of
middle age (but his hair was grey and flowed on his shoulders) was
seated on the rustic masonry of a rude fountain, reading; he rose when
he saw the lady, and doffed his hat; she, with the cordial sweetness
that accompanied her slightest acts, gave him an evening benison. Her
voice, her look, her cordial manner moved to its depths a heart lately
hardened against her. As she passed on, the man followed hastily,
"Lady!" he cried.

It struck the princess that this poor fellow had some request to prefer
to his master, and that he wished to do it through her medium; she
turned with a benevolent smile: "Can I do aught for you, good friend?"

His voice failed him; he stretched out his hand, which held his book,
she took it: the tiny volume was no stranger to her eyes; as if a ghost
had looked on her lonely watching, she trembled and grew pale, when she
opened it, and saw written in fair characters, by a hand now dust, "La
Rosa Blanca." The rustic knelt before her.

"Lady, queen!" he cried, "Sole relic of the unforgotten! is it thus that
we meet?"

"My cousin Edmund!"

"Hush! breathe not even to the silent woods the unknown word. Fancy not
that I am Plantagenet: for all that was of worth in him you name, died
when the White Rose scattered its leaves upon the unworthy earth."

"Ah! would that we had all died in that hour," cried Katherine: "why,
when the ungrateful world lost him, did not all the good and true die
also, so that they might no longer suffer!"

Plantagenet cast a reproachful glance on her, as he said, "Happy indeed
are those who die. O God! when I think of the many and the beloved, who,
a few years ago, were alive around me, and among whose low silent graves
I now walk alone, methinks I am dead; it is but the ghost of him you
knew that lingers upon earth."

"Yes, they are all gone," said the princess; "all who linked me to the
past, and were portions of my Richard's being. They are gone from before
me. But are they truly no more, or do they live, like you, brooding over
the lost, disdaining to communicate with one who lives but to remember
them? Of the death of several I have heard; but often I have longed with
bitterness to hear of you, and of the Spanish maiden, Monina de Faro."

"Her gentle soul," replied Edmund; "has flown to join him for whom she
lived and died. It is now two years since I was assured of this. A
friar, whom I had formerly well known, visited Lisbon; and I entreated
him to inquire for De Faro and his child. The commander of the Adalid
was almost forgotten; at last, an old sailor was found, who remembered
that, some years before, he had sailed for the Western Indies, and was
never heard of more."

"His daughter accompanied him?"

"In the churchyard of a convent, placed high among the foldings of those
lovely hills which overlook Lisbon, he was shown an humble tomb, half
defaced; her dear, sacred name is carved upon it, and half the date, the
14--, which showed that she died before the century began, in which we
now live.[3] She could not have survived our prince many months;
probably she died before him, nor ever knew the worst pang of all, the
ignominy linked with his beloved memory."

"And you, my kinsman, how long have you wedded penury and labour in this
obscure disguise?"

"Penury and labour," said Plantagenet, "are not confined to the humble
occupation I have adopted. I was made poor by the death-blow of my
hopes; and my chief labour is to tame my heart to resignation to the
will of God. Obscure you may indeed call my destination. Would I could
shroud it in tenfold night! Dearer to me is the silence and loneliness
of this spot, where I can for ever commune undisturbed with the past,
than a pomp which is stained by the blood of him whom once I thought we
all loved so well.

"When--oh, let me name not the frightful thing!--when he was gone for
ever, the whole world was to me but one miserable tomb. I groped in
darkness, misery my mate, eternal lamentation my sole delight. The first
thing that brought peace to my soul, was the beauty of this visible
universe. When God permitted, for some inscrutable purpose, moral evil
to be showered so plentifully over us, he gave us a thousand resources
out of ourselves in compensation. If I mingled with my fellow-creatures,
how dearly should I miss him, who was single among men for goodness,
wisdom, and heaven-born nobility of soul. My heart sickens at the evil
things that usurp the shape of humanity, and dare deem themselves of the
same species: I turn from all, loathing. But here there is no change, no
falling off, no loss of beauty and of good: these glades, these copses,
the seasons' change and elemental ministrations, are for ever the
same--the type of their Maker in glory and in good. The loveliness of
earth saves me from despair: the Majesty of Heaven imparts aspiring
hope. I bare my bosom to the breeze, and my wretched heart throbs less
wildly. I drink in the balmy sweetness of the hour, and repose again on
the goodness of my Creator.

"Yours is another existence, lady; you need the adulation of the
crowd--the luxury of palaces; you purchase these, even by communing
with the murderer of him who deserved a dearer recompense at your
hands."

Katherine smiled sadly at these last words, which betrayed the thought
that rankled in her kinsman's mind. "I thank you," she replied, "for
your details. I will not blame you for the false judgment you pass on
me. When years and quiet thought have brought you back from the tempest
of emotion that shakes you, you will read my heart better, and know that
it is still faithfully devoted to him I have lost."

"Ah! say those words again," cried Plantagenet, "and teach me to believe
them. I would give my right hand to approve your conduct, to love and
reverence you once again."

"Will you have patience with me then, while I strive to justify myself?"

"Oh, speak! My life, my soul's salvation, to hang upon your words."

Katherine raised her blue eyes to the now starry sky, as if to adjure
that to be the witness of her innocent thoughts; and then she said, "We
are all, dear cousin, impelled by our nature to make ourselves the
central point of the universe. Even those, who as they fancy, sacrifice
themselves for the love of God, do it more truly for love of themselves;
and the followers of virtue too often see their duties through the
obscure and deceptive medium which their own single, individual feelings
create. Yet we have one unerring guide; one given us at our birth, and
which He who died on the Cross for us, taught us to understand and to
appreciate, commanding us to make it the master-law of our lives. Call
it love, charity, or sympathy; it is the best, the angelic portion of
us. It teaches us to feel pain at others' pain, joy in their joy. The
more entirely we mingle our emotions with those of others, making our
well or ill being depend on theirs, the more completely do we cast away
selfishness, and approach the perfection of our nature.

"You are going to answer, perhaps to refute me--do not Remember I am a
woman, with a woman's tutelage in my early years, a woman's education in
the world, which is that of the heart--alas! for us--not of the head.
I have no school-learning, no logic--but simply the voice of my own
soul which speaks within me.

"I try to forget; you force me back upon myself. You attack; and you
beseech me to defend myself. So to do, I must dwell upon the sentiments
of a heart, which is human, and therefore faulty, but which has neither
guile nor malice in it.

"In my father's house--and when I wandered with my beloved outcast, I
had no difficulty in perceiving, nor--God was so gracious to me--in
fulfilling my duties. For in childhood I was cherished and favoured by
all; and when I became a wife, it was no wonder that I should love and
idolize the most single-hearted, generous, and kindly being that ever
trod the earth. To give myself away to him--to be a part of him--to
feel that we were an harmonious one in this discordant world, was a
happiness that falls to the lot of few:--defeat, chains,
imprisonment--all these were but shows; the reality was deep in our
hearts, invulnerable by any tyrant less remorseless than death. If this
life were the sum and boundary our being, I had possessed the
consummation and fulfilment of happiness.

"But we are taught to believe that our existence here is but the
stepping-stone to another beyond, and that 'death is the beginning of
life.' When we reach the summit of our desires, then we fall, and death
comes to destroy. He was lost to me, my glory, and my good! Little could
I avail to him now. The caresses, love, and watchful care, the obedience
and the heart's sacrifice, of a poor thing who groped darkling upon
earth, could avail nought to a spirit in Paradise. I was forced to feel
that I was alone: and as to me, to love is to exist; so in that dark
hour, in the gaspings of my agony, I felt that I must die, if for ever
divided from him who possessed my affections.

"Years have passed since then. If grief kills us not, we kill it. Not
that I cease to grieve; for each hour, revealing to me how excelling and
matchless the being was who once was mine, but renews the pang with
which I deplore my alien state upon earth. But such is God's will; I am
doomed to a divided existence, and I submit. Meanwhile I am human; and
human affections are the native, luxuriant growth of a heart whose
weakness it is, too eagerly and too fondly, to seek objects on whom to
expend its yearnings. My Richard's last act was to bestow me on his
sister: it were impious to retract a gift made by the dying. We wept
together--how long, and how bitterly!--the loss of our loved one; and
then together we turned to fulfil our duties. She had children; they
became as dear to me as to her. Margaret I cherish as the betrothed
bride of my ever dear cousin, the king of Scotland; and, when I
endeavour to foster the many virtues nature has implanted in the noble
mind of Prince Arthur, I am fulfilling, methinks, a task grateful in the
eyes of Richard, thus doing my part to bestow on the England he loved a
sovereign who will repair the usurper's crimes, and bestow happiness on
the realm.

"Nor is this all--despise me if you will, but I confess that I regard
others among those with whom I associate, with a clinging affection that
forbids me to separate myself from them. Did I not love the noble and
good, even as he did, while Richard lived? Does he not now, in his
heavenly abode, love them? and must my living heart be stone, because
that dear form is dust which was the medium of my communication with his
spirit? Where I see suffering, there I must bring my mite for its
relief. We are not deities to bestow in impassive benevolence. We give,
because we love--and the meshes of that sweet web, which mutual good
offices and sympathy weave, entangle and enthral me, and force me to
pain and pleasure, and to every variety of emotion which is the portion
of those whom it holds within its folds.

"I quarrel not with--I admire--those who can be good and benevolent,
and yet keep their hearts to themselves, the shrine of worship for God,
a haven which no wind can enter. I am not one of these, and yet take no
shame therefore: I feel my many weaknesses, and know that some of these
form a part of my strength; the reviled part of our nature being a
portion of that which elevates us to the godlike. My reason, my sense of
duty, my conscientious observance of its dictates, you will set up as
the better part; but I venerate also the freer impulses of our souls. My
passions, my susceptible imagination, my faltering dependence on others,
my clinging to the sense of joy--this makes an integral part of
Katherine, nor the worst part of her. When my soul quits this 'bower of
flesh,' these leaves and flowers, which are perhaps the growth of it,
may decay and die. I know not; as it is, I am content to be an imperfect
creature, so that I never lose the ennobling attribute of my species,
the constant endeavour to be more perfect.

"I do not blame you, my cousin, for seeking repose in solitude after
much endurance. But unquiet should I feel in the unreplying loneliness
which forms your peace. I must love and be loved. I must feel that my
dear and chosen friends are happier through me. When I have wandered out
of myself in my endeavour to shed pleasure around, I must again return
laden with the gathered sweets on which I feed and live. Permit this to
be, unblamed--permit a heart whose sufferings have been, and are, so
many and so bitter, to reap what joy it can from the strong necessity it
feels to be sympathized with--to love."
